[Amit Varma]: What does it mean to be a citizen?
[Amit Varma]: More specifically, what does it mean to be a citizen in a city?
[Amit Varma]: Here are some things that we know about India.
[Amit Varma]: 1.
[Amit Varma]: India is more urban than we realize, and one day soon, most of India will live in its cities.
[Amit Varma]: 2.
[Amit Varma]: This is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's driven by the voluntary actions of people.
[Amit Varma]: 3.
[Amit Varma]: All our governance is centralized and nowhere near as local as it should be.
[Amit Varma]: 4.
[Amit Varma]: Even though our democracy has endured, there is a mismatch between power and accountability
[Amit Varma]: at the local level.
[Amit Varma]: 5.
[Amit Varma]: Citizens in India are largely disempowered or at least feel disempowered, and the state
[Amit Varma]: is an imposing presence.
[Amit Varma]: All of these raise the question, if our system of governance is broken because of a flaw
[Amit Varma]: in our democracy, what can we do to fix it?
[Amit Varma]: Can citizens assert themselves and reclaim their rights?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago in episode 160, I had a stimulating conversation about participatory democracy
[Amit Varma]: with the polymath thinker Ashwin Mahesh.
[Amit Varma]: That was a hugely popular episode, and though it lasted around two and a half hours, it
[Amit Varma]: fell too short.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm delighted to have Ashwin back on The Seen and the Unseen to chat about his thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on urban governance based on a paper and a presentation by him that will be linked from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin is in some ways a perfect guest for the show because I like to digress and take
[Amit Varma]: the conversation into unexpected and different directions, and Ashwin's knowledge is both
[Amit Varma]: wide and deep.
[Amit Varma]: So besides urban governance, we also chatted about the lockdown, how we should think about
[Amit Varma]: education in an out-of-the-box way, and the responsibility, helplessness, and incentives
[Amit Varma]: of citizens.
[Amit Varma]: As tends to happen, the conversation got more and more fun as we went along, and we argued
[Amit Varma]: a lot in the last part of the show.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure there'll be much food for thought for everyone listening.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen has been a labour of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Seen and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts, and I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself – scheduling
[Amit Varma]: guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this – for every episode of The Seen and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to seenunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: Seenunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen yet again.
[Guest]: Well, my pleasure to be back, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the episode that we recorded a few months ago, episode 160 on participatory
[Amit Varma]: democracy, which will be linked from the show notes, was actually incredibly popular.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, people still keep writing in about that.
[Amit Varma]: And I did ask you a lot of questions about your personal journey in that episode, which
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to make you go through again, because we've already done that and listeners
[Amit Varma]: can listen to that.
[Amit Varma]: But what I didn't explore in that episode was, you know, while we spoke about your career
[Amit Varma]: and your trajectory and how you, you know, got through the various interests and passions
[Amit Varma]: that brought you to where you are, we didn't speak one so much about your personal life.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I'm interested in knowing, you know, how have you been through this lockdown?
[Amit Varma]: What's life been like?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about family, about home, about what you do in your downtime?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, I guess I'm not that different from millions of other people, both in terms
[Guest]: of regular home life and also in terms of how that has been impacted by the pandemic.
[Guest]: I have two school going children, and therefore, there's a new rhythm that needs to be established
[Guest]: around that.
[Guest]: It's fortunate that many of my kids' friends from school live in the community where I
[Guest]: live.
[Guest]: So, in some sense, there is a semblance of continuity from the school environment.
[Guest]: And it's also a small school, it doesn't have very many students.
[Guest]: So in that sense, having a subset of kids in your own community, it's a larger subset
[Guest]: than it would be for any other school in some way, in percentage terms.
[Guest]: And so, I think they're managing okay, but they'd like to be able to go to school once
[Guest]: in a while.
[Guest]: And the school even, I think, might allow occasional visits by parents just sort of
[Unknown]: for kids and parents to remember what the school is like and stuff like that.
[Guest]: But you know, on the whole, all of us have to be responsible through this pandemic.
[Guest]: And there's not a whole lot anyone seems to be able to do other than wait.
[Guest]: It's not always clear what one is waiting for.
[Guest]: But in a way, there's a lot of waiting, certainly.
[Guest]: Mostly, a combination of things that I do can still be done from home, whether it's
[Guest]: for Mapunity, or for India Together, or for any of the other things I'm involved in.
[Guest]: Obviously, the work at Lithium required a lot of hands-on work, but I've finally reached
[Guest]: the stage where that's probably best done by another set of professional people.
[Guest]: I'm thinking more and more about coming back to the public problem-solving things that
[Guest]: interest me personally.
[Unknown]: And in that sense, the pandemic has given me an opportunity to think about how to reconnect
[Guest]: with some of the things that I haven't done as much of in the last couple of years.
[Guest]: A lot of the work in the last couple of years has been around the electric vehicles stuff
[Guest]: at Lithium.
[Guest]: But I really have been wanting to get back to Mapunity in particular, and also my interest
[Guest]: in public interest media.
[Guest]: And I think both of those decisions were in some ways accelerated by the time available
[Guest]: to think about these sorts of things in a pandemic.
[Guest]: And the municipal election is coming up here in Bangalore in, I don't know, in April.
[Guest]: That's part of the things we'll talk about, not really clear how soon it will come up.
[Guest]: But that's another opportunity to sort of be part of and influence the thinking about
[Guest]: governance in the city, public participation, things that have always interested me in the
[Guest]: last 10, 15 years.
[Guest]: So it's a nice pivotal moment in some ways.
[Guest]: I think sort of at some level, the rest of it is, you know, one day at a time, trying
[Guest]: to see where all of this is going to lead and just responding to whatever happens in
[Guest]: some sense.
[Guest]: It's not really clear if tomorrow is going to bring more bad news or some semblance of
[Guest]: good news.
[Guest]: Vaccines seem to come and go in the news, a little bit like oscillations on a sine curve.
[Guest]: So in a way, there's a lot of wait and watch.
[Guest]: Some of my family members got COVID and that was not something I was sort of mentally prepared
[Guest]: for.
[Guest]: And it takes you a while to sort of adjust to concerns like that.
[Unknown]: It's one of those things where you sort of know that things like fatality rates are very
[Guest]: low, but once you get it or someone close to you gets it, you tend to forget the other
[Guest]: 98 or 99% and imagine yourself in the 1 or 2%.
[Guest]: And those are anxious things.
[Guest]: I've also, just because of the things I get involved in, I've had many, many experiences
[Guest]: with people whose need for treatment was acute, immediate, and yet they were not able to access
[Guest]: it for a variety of reasons.
[Guest]: You know, young women getting thrown out of hospitals at midnight and multiple members
[Guest]: of families dying while waiting for care.
[Guest]: These are terrible things to go through, even for someone who's not immediately impacted.
[Guest]: And I imagine that these are really bad for the families that are experienced with them.
[Guest]: What it tells us is that there is a tremendous price that we are paying for two things.
[Guest]: Weak governance, not just in India, but around the world, and a really sharp disconnect between
[Guest]: the things that ought to matter and the things that seem to matter in political life.
[Guest]: Around the world, frankly, you would think this is the kind of problem that ought not
[Guest]: to exist.
[Guest]: It's a bit like climate change, right?
[Guest]: You think that a bunch of sensible people with sufficient decency and foresight ought
[Guest]: to be able to anticipate and solve a problem like that.
[Guest]: But this whole sensible people with sufficient decency and foresight, it seems like a quest
[Guest]: for another planet or something like that.
[Guest]: In a way, it's becoming harshly clear to a lot of people that somewhere along the narrative
[Guest]: of even democracy that we have built for ourselves, there are very large gaps, and those gaps
[Guest]: become apparent at times like this.
[Guest]: And there is an important response that is needed to say, how are we going to bridge
[Guest]: those gaps?
[Guest]: How do we make sure that people in positions of authority are also responsible and actually
[Guest]: proactively do the things that we'd like them to do?
[Guest]: I think this pandemic really should provoke a lot more of us to asking those questions.
[Guest]: Some of us have been fortunate not to have suffered terrible consequences as a result
[Guest]: of it, but it's now reached a stage where each of us knows at least several other people
[Guest]: who have suffered greatly.
[Guest]: And really, that has been the difficult part of the pandemic, just knowing what else is
[Guest]: going on and also a sense of helplessness about the whole thing.
[Guest]: I can imagine that if people like me who are reasonably well-connected with governance
[Guest]: systems feel this way, that for a lot of other people, just shutting it out of their minds
[Guest]: entirely seems the only option.
[Guest]: And maybe that's what explains so much of the non-compliance with good practices that
[Guest]: people don't even want to think about at this point, because it's scary, it's not clear
[Guest]: what they should do.
[Guest]: It's bizarre.
[Guest]: The number of circumstances in which you have to do the right thing is so large that at
[Guest]: some point, people will just throw up their hands and say, hell, if it happens, it happens.
[Guest]: It is scary.
[Guest]: I'm hoping it's not going to be more than, initially I thought it was going to be a three,
[Guest]: six, nine month thing, but now it seems every day like it's going to be another three, six
[Guest]: or nine months rather than just three, six or nine months.
[Guest]: I think we should prepare for coming out of this in a reasonable way only by the summer
[Guest]: of next year.
[Guest]: The winter could be a difficult time globally.
[Guest]: What else can you do?
[Guest]: And there are certain parts of the economy, certain types of livelihoods that have been
[Guest]: massively impacted.
[Guest]: And in India in particular, because we don't have the public systems to support people
[Guest]: through these kinds of downturns, a lot of people are vulnerable as a result.
[Guest]: And I imagine that at least 50 million people have gone into poverty as a result of the
[Guest]: pandemic who previously would not have been thought of as poor people.
[Guest]: And it has set back our development journey by at least six to 10 years in pure numerical
[Guest]: terms.
[Guest]: A lot of that is true around the world.
[Guest]: Like I said, at this point, you're reduced to living through it and finding your way
[Guest]: back each day at a time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The economist, Abhisachi Kaur, I think he posted this graph on Twitter where he showed,
[Amit Varma]: you know, given certain assumptions about how much we will grow, how much, you know,
[Amit Varma]: COVID has set us back.
[Amit Varma]: And I think his calculation was that it will take till 2033 until our economy goes to where
[Amit Varma]: it would otherwise have been in a time of normal growth at five and a half.
[Amit Varma]: And he was calculating at COVID plus seven, something like that.
[Amit Varma]: I was also kind of struck by what you said about people shutting it out because they
[Amit Varma]: simply can't understand what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: So you shut it out and you're in denial and that leads you to behave in odd ways.
[Amit Varma]: Because it strikes me that that is what we do in a sense in life itself.
[Amit Varma]: That most people, you know, the very truth of our mortality, for example, or the complexity
[Amit Varma]: of the universe, which we can't possibly fathom is so scary that, you know, apart from doing
[Amit Varma]: things like inventing religions to build narratives to come to terms with it, we also sort of
[Amit Varma]: shut it out.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that this is kind of, in a sense, a more localized version of that,
[Amit Varma]: that certain things are not in your control.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: You go in denial about it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to sort of take a little Chinese box approach to the rest of the episode in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that the core of the episode and what I would really like to talk about, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, urban governance and your ideas on how cities and urban governance should
[Amit Varma]: be reformed and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Before I get to that, I also want to talk a bit about map unity and lithium and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, briefly discuss that.
[Amit Varma]: But before even that, I kind of want to come back to the earlier question of what you do
[Amit Varma]: in your downtime, because just, you know, something that I've been thinking about recently
[Amit Varma]: also is that these seemingly inconsequential choices that we often make at a personal level
[Amit Varma]: of how will I spend my time?
[Amit Varma]: Will I read a book?
[Amit Varma]: Will I, you know, play a game on my mobile?
[Amit Varma]: Will I check Twitter obsessively to see who's trolling me now?
[Amit Varma]: Will I watch something on Netflix or will I listen to a podcast and go running?
[Amit Varma]: All of these choices are actually far more consequential than we imagine, because over
[Amit Varma]: a period of time, they sort of shape our thinking and they shape who we are.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, these seemingly trivial choices make all the difference.
[Amit Varma]: I'm curious about one, do you think consciously about, you know, your productivity, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and how you spend your day and how you divide your time?
[Amit Varma]: And also, what do you do in your downtime to relax?
[Amit Varma]: And what are your guilty pleasures?
[Amit Varma]: Do you spend three hours every day surfing music videos on YouTube, as some of us do?
[Amit Varma]: What's, you know, tell me, give me a sense of what that is like.
[Guest]: Well, you remember from our earlier conversation, my 15 minutes to 20 minutes every day of trying
[Guest]: to do a few things that keep a certain rhythm to my life.
[Guest]: I still try to do that.
[Guest]: And I don't think that gets affected very much by a pandemic, even.
[Guest]: It's kind of odd to say that even a pandemic doesn't affect something.
[Guest]: But since it's only 15-20 minutes a day, I'm able to do that, definitely.
[Guest]: One of the things that has come down is the ability to meet strangers, and I'm trying
[Guest]: to be more deliberate about that, especially online.
[Guest]: But broadly, what I find is that in some way, not needing to travel as much has actually
[Guest]: opened up time to do things that otherwise go in simply commuting or travel.
[Guest]: And some things have happened, I think, because I have the additional time.
[Guest]: I've been able to think more carefully about education, for example, and it's an interesting
[Guest]: time to think about education because the whole education framework has now collapsed
[Guest]: as a result of the pandemic.
[Guest]: And all our assumptions about the delivery and the governance of education, especially
[Guest]: public education, have entirely gone for a toss.
[Guest]: And if we are smart about this, we will take the opportunity to reimagine education.
[Guest]: But even without that, there's an increasing set of choices that people are starting to
[Guest]: make for their own learning, which I think will radically alter the landscape of learning.
[Guest]: And that's something that I've been able to spend more time thinking about because of
[Guest]: the pandemic.
[Guest]: I shut down the office because of the pandemic.
[Guest]: It didn't seem like it was worth paying rent to keep up an establishment.
[Guest]: I instead rented the neighboring flat, which is actually a much more useful way to spend
[Guest]: the same amount of money because it gives you close by additional space to work out
[Guest]: of and also have as a personal space.
[Guest]: So people at home are not complaining that you're always on the phone or always on the
[Guest]: computer and there are enough spaces to do that quietly.
[Guest]: So I'm sort of able to have even this conversation with you for more than a couple of hours without
[Guest]: worrying that anyone's going to get annoyed about that.
[Guest]: So things like that, I think of certain adjustments that people make, educate each of us about
[Unknown]: what the alternatives could be, the things that we've previously taken for granted.
[Guest]: You have to go to an office, you have to work certain times of the day, work in certain
[Guest]: ways, you have to have face-to-face meetings.
[Guest]: All of these things are under tremendous reassessment and scrutiny now.
[Guest]: And it seems like at least 60% of what we did previously was probably not as useful
[Guest]: as we thought it was.
[Guest]: And so you could imagine it being different.
[Guest]: I've always been in favor of a six and a half to seven hour workday.
[Guest]: And I generally don't think that people can be productive beyond that anyway.
[Guest]: Even school days, I think shouldn't be more than four and a half to five hours.
[Guest]: I can't imagine that you can send kids to six and seven hours of school and think that
[Guest]: you're adding to their learning beyond the first three or four hours.
[Guest]: So I think this reconstruction of time for various purposes is really the big thing that
[Guest]: I've been toying with during the pandemic.
[Guest]: Of late, I've started going out a little bit more and meeting more people and feeling comfortable
[Guest]: about that.
[Guest]: I also know that in doing that, all of us are taking risks, both for ourselves and unfortunately
[Guest]: for others too.
[Guest]: There's no way to come out of this without that risk.
[Guest]: And some of it is, you can tell yourself it's a calculated risk, but if you don't know the
[Guest]: formula, it's difficult to tell what a calculation will lead you to.
[Guest]: I feel like we're taking calculated risks without knowing the equation itself, but it
[Guest]: is what it is.
[Guest]: I've been reading huge stacks of books that have piled up over the years where I would
[Guest]: – and normally when I buy a book, I write down the date on which I buy the book and
[Guest]: try to see when I actually get around to reading it.
[Guest]: And if those gaps are more than 18 months or 24 months, I slow down the book buying
[Guest]: telling myself that I'd better read the ones that I've already bought.
[Guest]: I think now I've brought it down to six months or seven months of gap, which presumably that's
[Unknown]: because I've been able to read a lot more.
[Guest]: And I have some neighbors who seem to read five times as fast as I do, probably as fast
[Guest]: as you do.
[Guest]: And so that motivates me to talk to them about what they're reading and read some of those
[Guest]: things as well.
[Guest]: I've been watching a lot of the TED Talks.
[Guest]: For no particular reason, I just kind of randomly pick one and watch that.
[Guest]: It's amazing what a variety of topics get covered in TED.
[Guest]: Many, many years ago, when I first got introduced to CRISP by one of my friends, it seemed like
[Guest]: it was really a platform for ideas, and each of those ideas was a very powerful thing.
[Guest]: I think today it's become even more than that.
[Guest]: It's not just a platform for ideas.
[Guest]: It's even a platform for stances that people take towards many things.
[Guest]: And therefore, it sort of lets you think powerfully about each of those as well.
[Guest]: You may agree, you may not agree, but I think it's useful to have a forum like that, where
[Guest]: you can sort of see things that are stated provocatively and succinctly and ask yourself,
[Guest]: what do I think about that?
[Guest]: And also, I'm thinking more about Bill Drayton's idea of cognitive empathy, where he says...
[Guest]: Bill Drayton started the Ashoka Fellowship, the Social Entrepreneurship Fellowship around
[Guest]: the world, and he talks about this idea of not just caring about others, but actively
[Guest]: doing something that allows you to feel that your empathy is cognitive as well, rather
[Guest]: than merely an acknowledgement of other people's difficulties.
[Guest]: And so, you can take problem after problem and ask yourself, what's the difference between
[Guest]: mere empathy and cognitive empathy?
[Guest]: And how I can be closer to the second one than to the first one?
[Guest]: And God knows there are enough problems to work on.
[Guest]: So you can say, if I care about public education, what are three things that I ought to be doing
[Unknown]: to convince myself that I actually care about this?
[Unknown]: I think a lot of people...
[Unknown]: We're seeing this.
[Guest]: A lot of people care about a lot of things, but if you probe the extent to which they're
[Guest]: acting on what they care about, it doesn't often reflect the extent to which they say
[Guest]: they care about it.
[Guest]: I don't think that makes them hypocritical.
[Guest]: I think it just means that there is still one more step that they need to take.
[Guest]: And I've sort of been learning about such deliberate steps and how to take them.
[Guest]: So a lot of the day gets filled up in simply saying, how many deliberate steps can I take
[Guest]: that I actually don't need to take to continue with my life, but which I think are important
[Guest]: to take, interesting to take, things like that.
[Guest]: And there are certain things you can't do.
[Guest]: You can't go swimming.
[Guest]: You can't go whatever, five other things that you would otherwise have done.
[Guest]: So that frees up time for stuff like that.
[Guest]: I thought about getting an exercise machine at home and then decided that that was probably
[Guest]: overkill.
[Guest]: And I somehow don't see myself doing that very often, even if I were to get that machine.
[Guest]: But be that as it may, I think we've come to a very different imagination of time because
[Guest]: almost a year is now going to go by in our lives as a result of the pandemic in ways
[Guest]: that we did not anticipate at all.
[Guest]: And a year is a very long time.
[Amit Varma]: I'm glad you're not getting an exercise machine, because if I could turn my laptop camera right
[Amit Varma]: now, I could show you an elliptical in the corner and, you know, there's jeans hanging
[Amit Varma]: from the handle and there's a pair of old shoes on the stepper.
[Amit Varma]: And that's clearly, you know, not something that's worked for me, at least.
[Amit Varma]: I was, you know, also struck by how you spoke about, you know, reduce work hours and we
[Amit Varma]: don't really need so many hours.
[Amit Varma]: And I just came across this quote today morning, this tweet, in fact, by Naval Ravikant, where
[Amit Varma]: he says, and I'll read it out quote, you don't have eight creative problem solving hours
[Amit Varma]: in the day.
[Amit Varma]: You have to spend your time wisely, a strop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of strikes me because more and more as I try to get more done with my time,
[Amit Varma]: I realized that my best hours are when I wake up and I'm fresh in the morning and I absolutely
[Amit Varma]: have to maximize that and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason this quote was even handy for me, and I thought I'd ask you about this,
[Amit Varma]: because this again came to mind when you spoke about watching TED Talks, is one of the things
[Amit Varma]: I've been, again, thinking about recently is that, look, I might read a lot of books
[Amit Varma]: and I might watch a lot of videos and I might get in different amounts of knowledge and
[Amit Varma]: insight from elsewhere, but how do I retain it?
[Amit Varma]: And especially as I go deeper into middle age, my memory is just horrible and I'll just
[Amit Varma]: forget a lot of stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And I am very struck, therefore, by this concept of the second brain, which, you know, I think
[Amit Varma]: pioneered by someone called Tiago Forte, where the idea is that you use tools and you use
[Amit Varma]: apps, so all the knowledge that you're gathering, you kind of collate them in, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: he describes as a second brain, which is a collection of apps and tools which helps you
[Amit Varma]: keep all of this together.
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, what I've recently been doing a lot is using this incredible app called
[Amit Varma]: Rome Research, where anytime I watch a TED Talk, for example, which I like, I'll actually
[Amit Varma]: take notes from it.
[Amit Varma]: And it has nesting, it has bidirectional linking.
[Amit Varma]: So it is always there.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier, when I took notes on books, for example, for my research or whatever, there would be
[Amit Varma]: disconnected word documents and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But here, you know, I've got a master doc, which says, Ashwin Mahesh, and I might have
[Amit Varma]: links from the notes from the episode we did together.
[Amit Varma]: And I might have further notes from the paper you sent me, the presentation you sent me
[Amit Varma]: before we recorded this episode.
[Amit Varma]: And it's all there forever.
[Amit Varma]: It's linked back and forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it's quite kind of wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Do you have, you know, since your thinking is so systemic and clear, do you also have
[Amit Varma]: ways of sort of making sure that you sort of retain your knowledge and insights from
[Amit Varma]: all the reading that you do and the watching that you do?
[Guest]: Well, I wish I could say yes, but you know, the answer is probably closer to no than yes.
[Guest]: What I had tried to do off late, though, is try to change that.
[Guest]: And I sort of forced myself into accepting certain things as useful instruments for that
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: And I've decided that teaching what I know is a useful instrument for such change.
[Guest]: Because in order to teach, I first have to write down what it is that I know.
[Guest]: And that sort of gets me into some part of the documentation, organization of what I
[Guest]: know, so that I can then subsequently tell it to a few more people.
[Unknown]: There are schools of public policy, schools of problem solving, you know, professors interested
[Guest]: in problem solving courses.
[Guest]: So I've started collaborating with a few of them, and in 2021, in particular, I plan to
[Guest]: teach at least in three different such environments.
[Guest]: And hopefully, the act of doing that helps.
[Guest]: Also, I've sort of tried to document some things on my website, just because of the
[Guest]: diversity of things I get into, sort of just as a way of organizing my thoughts.
[Guest]: And also, as a way of repeatedly asking, what are the ideas that inform the actions?
[Guest]: Because you can get into a lot of actions without asking yourself what ideas inform
[Unknown]: your actions, or what ideas you're coming to as a result of your actions, or even what
[Guest]: ideas you appear to be endorsing as a result of your actions.
[Guest]: So I actually sort of have spent some time putting that material together on the website.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think some discipline in documentation will arise as a result of all this in the
[Guest]: next six months, at least.
[Guest]: It remains to be seen whether I can sustain that.
[Guest]: Sometimes you put the first material together.
[Guest]: I taught a course at IAM many years ago called Reinventing Government.
[Guest]: After three years, I decided that the course material itself needed reinventing.
[Guest]: So in a way, you can take good first steps in any direction.
[Guest]: But really, it is quite important to keep taking those second steps and third steps,
[Guest]: which make the first step meaningful.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you can sort of take lots of journeys of first steps and never get anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned that you were also sort of thinking about education deeply because
[Amit Varma]: of the pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, you know, we can see the surface reasons and the first order reasons
[Amit Varma]: for thinking about education, because obviously, instead of going to a school physically, kids
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, getting educated on Zoom.
[Amit Varma]: But I have, and again, I'd like to know your thoughts on this, because, you know, it struck
[Amit Varma]: me for a while that our education system is incredibly outdated in every possible way,
[Amit Varma]: not just the obvious ones, that we are stuck with the inertia of the past, that in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you know, economists call about isomorphic mimicry, which is you take a policy from another
[Amit Varma]: place, and you try to implement it wherever you are.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that there is also a version of that happening across time, where something
[Amit Varma]: that worked at one time or that made intuitive sense is completely unsuited to another time.
[Amit Varma]: And we simply we just assume that our kids will go to school for 10 years or 12 years
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, they will be college, these will be the subjects, these will be the social
[Amit Varma]: sciences in their different silos, these will be the whatever and you know, one of the consequences
[Amit Varma]: of that not working that being dysfunctional, in a sense, is that part of our jobs prices
[Amit Varma]: is that one, of course, there aren't enough jobs, but also that a lot of the people who
[Amit Varma]: are getting degrees, including higher education degrees, have no skills, they are in equipped
[Amit Varma]: for anything in the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that at some level, the pandemic might be an opportunity to really
[Amit Varma]: sit down and cast away the inertia of the past and think anew about, you know, everything
[Amit Varma]: from the bottom up.
[Amit Varma]: What are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because you mentioned you've been thinking a lot about this.
[Amit Varma]: So you know?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the conclusion, or at least one conclusion I've come to, is that we have failed to ask
[Guest]: and answer an important question, and that question is, who should teach?
[Guest]: It's an interesting question, if you think about it, who should teach?
[Guest]: We'll come to all the other things later, where they should teach, how they should teach,
[Guest]: and all of that, but who should teach?
[Guest]: It seems logical to say that people who know things should teach, if you don't have anything
[Guest]: to teach.
[Guest]: So and therefore, what the pandemic has essentially created is a situation where merely knowing
[Guest]: things is enough to be allowed to teach.
[Guest]: And of course, to some extent, even before the pandemic, MOOCs and Coursera and 20 other
[Guest]: things had begun to make that possible.
[Guest]: Essentially saying to the formal system that the way in which you decide who should teach
[Guest]: is unacceptable to me, because what the formal systems have done is they have connected too
[Guest]: many other questions to this question.
[Guest]: So if Amit should teach, because he knows, let's say, podcasting.
[Guest]: So if Amit should teach podcasting, where should he teach podcasting?
[Guest]: If he taught it online in a loosely certified way, that's one thing, but for you to teach
[Guest]: podcasting in a quote-unquote recognized institution is much, much harder when you think about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: You might be the king of podcasting, and you're pretty close to it, but the thing is that
[Guest]: you wouldn't be allowed to teach this in a formal setting as it stands now, because the
[Guest]: setting doesn't permit that anymore.
[Guest]: The second thing is that you could turn the question on its head and say, who should you
[Guest]: teach?
[Guest]: So who should you teach?
[Guest]: So let's say that Amit is 16 years old and he wants to be a cricket player, and what
[Guest]: should you teach him?
[Guest]: Chemistry and mathematics and history or a lot of cricket, and maybe cricket statistics
[Guest]: and cricket broadcasting and cricket commentary and cricket sports medicine and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Actually, I think we've gone from the important question to the unimportant ones really quickly,
[Guest]: and the unimportant ones are easier for governments to get a grip on, and that's really why they've
[Guest]: gone to the unimportant ones.
[Guest]: Historically, in fact, if you thought about it, people who knew things taught.
[Guest]: That's all it was, there wasn't any blessing for that beyond the fact that they knew things.
[Guest]: But with mass education in particular, has come the expectation that there should be
[Guest]: controls and filters on who should teach.
[Guest]: So certification has become a big part of the teaching, being allowed to teach.
[Guest]: But certification, I mean, I remember a friend of mine that I am telling me that in India,
[Guest]: we probably have the world's largest gap between certification and learning.
[Guest]: Just because someone has a certificate doesn't mean that they actually know anything.
[Guest]: You've seen news reports about students taking exams in Bihar, where they're climbing in
[Guest]: and out of windows to be able to copy from each other.
[Guest]: And you're thinking, surely this isn't anything that any employer will find credible.
[Guest]: And so I think what the pandemic has done is it has basically turned the system on its
[Guest]: head and said, no one really took you seriously anyway, now they don't even have to take you
[Guest]: seriously.
[Guest]: But there are people who still say this is just for the elite, maybe 10% of the population
[Guest]: can make choices like this, 90% of the population can't make choices that are any different
[Guest]: from the conventional ones available from the 1500s or the 1600s.
[Guest]: That's probably still true, but new things, when you look at even MOOCs and online education,
[Unknown]: they weren't very big 10, 15 years ago.
[Unknown]: But two years ago, I read somewhere that 20% of all degrees being given online, the MOOCs
[Guest]: were giving out at least that many certificates as 20% of all physical degrees.
[Guest]: So in a way, the numbers are growing, the modularity of learning is expanding.
[Guest]: That's an important thing, that this tight correlation between your age and the intensity
[Guest]: of your learning.
[Guest]: So if you were to try to learn basic English at age 11, people would find that odd and
[Guest]: ask why haven't you learned it earlier?
[Guest]: Or even if you were basic Hindi or basic Kannada, whatever, whatever be your medium of instruction,
[Guest]: people would find it odd that you haven't learned it.
[Guest]: But if you were to learn basic Russian at age 11 in India, nobody would think that there's
[Unknown]: anything wrong.
[Guest]: In fact, you could learn basic Russian at age 61, and nobody would think that there's
[Guest]: anything wrong with that.
[Guest]: I actually think there's nothing wrong with learning basic physics when you're 61 too,
[Guest]: or learning basic mathematics when you're 61 too.
[Guest]: But we have a system of learning that has tightly coupled age to learning.
[Guest]: And not only that, it has sort of bracketed those ages, all 15-year-olds are in whatever,
[Guest]: 10th grade, all 13-year-olds are in 8th grade, so on and so forth, which is a bizarre thing
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: Education is too important and too personal to the learner to expect that any form of
[Guest]: it can result in learning through conformity.
[Guest]: The system demands that we abandon conformity, but conformity is the thing that the state
[Guest]: likes, the state is comfortable with, and that is the tension that needs to be sorted
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: I sort of, especially with Ken Robinson passing away this year, I spent a lot of time reading
[Guest]: and watching him, and my sense of it is that we're still not comfortable, and this has
[Guest]: parallels with governance in general, we're still not comfortable trusting the school
[Guest]: administrator or the school principal in a public school system.
[Guest]: We're still thinking that the school administrator and the school principal is just a delivery
[Guest]: agent of something that is decided at a much higher level, and no educational institution
[Guest]: can become good through that stance.
[Guest]: I feel we have to, and it's the same thing that we see with decentralization of other
[Guest]: things too, that fundamentally people in a locality are not empowered to be part of decision
[Guest]: making in that locality.
[Guest]: There is no force on earth that can fundamentally help produce good outcomes despite that, and
[Guest]: we keep thinking that state governments and national governments are going to solve hyperlocal
[Guest]: problems.
[Guest]: They're not going to solve hyperlocal problems.
[Guest]: They have even no visibility into those problems, they have no capacity to respond to those
[Guest]: problems.
[Guest]: A lot of people think that in India the national government is going to solve a lot of problems.
[Unknown]: The national government doesn't even have the staff to solve 90% of the problems that
[Guest]: people care about.
[Guest]: Even the few schemes that they run are actually implemented by state governments.
[Guest]: So in a way, I don't think that we have any capacity for problem solving in administration,
[Guest]: in public administration, that can be separated from decentralization, and that is really
[Guest]: the problem, that there is a tension between the growing numbers of people moving to cities
[Guest]: and the large agglomerations that produces, and the reality that despite such agglomeration,
[Guest]: it is decentralized participatory problem solving that is actually going to make even
[Guest]: those agglomerations work well.
[Guest]: And I find that that is repeatedly true in many, many disciplines.
[Guest]: Education is available in a very different way, but it still needs to be personal and
[Guest]: child-centered in some way.
[Guest]: Skilling is thought of only as sort of an afterthought, that if you fail in formal education,
[Guest]: then you go to a vocational program, which is very silly because 90% of the jobs out
[Guest]: there are not jobs you would get through formal education anyway.
[Guest]: If anything, vocational learning should be the norm, and only those who need more than
[Guest]: that should be going to formal learning, but we have the opposite system in many cases.
[Guest]: So what I've been reflecting on is how comfortable we have become with the status quo, and why
[Guest]: systems of administration struggle to overcome the status quo.
[Guest]: There's a very interesting experiment that was a professor at Harvard called Lant Pritchett.
[Guest]: You might know Lant.
[Unknown]: He worked for a while with the Administrative Reforms Commission, too.
[Guest]: There was one interesting thing that he taught some of us, saying, look, if there are 25
[Guest]: things that need to change simultaneously, it's very difficult to figure out which one
[Guest]: you should touch first.
[Guest]: And so the first exercise you do is to ask yourself, which of these 25 things has the
[Guest]: potential to have a domino effect on other things?
[Guest]: And you rank them in that order, and then decide which ones to touch and which ones
[Unknown]: not to touch.
[Unknown]: So really, so for a lot of public problems, this is what I've been doing now.
[Unknown]: So here are 10 things that need to change, and as we talk about urbanization, we'll go
[Guest]: through 10, 15 things that need to change, but if you could only touch one of them, which
[Guest]: one would you touch, right, because you can't really touch 15 of them until you get into
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: And I've seen even friends of mine who get into government and even become chief ministers
[Guest]: sort of have difficulty in touching 15 things at the same time.
[Guest]: So it's not only about power and authority and decision-making rights.
[Guest]: It's about actually being able to carry that out in a system that is weak to begin with.
[Unknown]: State capacity is very low.
[Guest]: We have to accept that.
[Guest]: And in a system where the state capacity is low, you can't really pull off all the things
[Guest]: that you would like to.
[Guest]: The state is nonetheless not comfortable with a greater balance of power between itself
[Guest]: and market and society, and in fact, actively puts out the narrative that market and society
[Guest]: cannot be trusted.
[Guest]: So in such a situation, it seems like what you're going to get is enduring underdevelopment.
[Guest]: I mean, look at this election that's going on in Bihar.
[Guest]: You have two major formations, each of whom has delivered 15 years of lost in the nation
[Guest]: status to that state, and they are the leading contenders for power.
[Guest]: It's a very sad thing that somehow we have allowed ourselves to arrive at a situation
[Guest]: which is deeply hostile to the public interest.
[Guest]: But any step that you would take to correct it, it seems like it can only be effective
[Guest]: if 10 other steps are also taken at the same time, and people find the enormity of all
[Guest]: that too much, and they just throw up their hands, which perpetuates the problem further.
[Unknown]: So this is the cycle that you have to overcome, and this is one of the things that I sort
[Unknown]: of, you know, I'm thinking of this Center for Public Problem Solving, right?
[Unknown]: So what is the Center for Public Problem Solving, and what is the problem that it's trying to
[Guest]: overcome?
[Guest]: It's not actually the employability deficit or the governance deficit or whatever.
[Guest]: The problem is not the sectoral thing.
[Guest]: The problem is how we have organized problem solving itself, right?
[Guest]: If you look at, let's go into organization with a good segue from here.
[Guest]: If I were to ask you, how many levels of government are there in the constitution and in the laws?
[Amit Varma]: What would you say?
[Amit Varma]: I'll think of, you know, in practical terms, what are the effects that we see, and of course
[Amit Varma]: we see the central level and the state level, and after the 74th amendment, which of course
[Amit Varma]: we'll discuss in much more detail, maybe, you know, a couple of levels below that, but
[Guest]: that's as far as my understanding would go.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So most people will say that central, state, and local, right?
[Guest]: But there are actually five levels of governance that are in the constitution and in the law.
[Guest]: There is the metropolitan planning level, especially for the larger cities, which exists
[Guest]: in the law, but not in practice.
[Unknown]: There is also participatory democracy at the local level, which again exists in the law,
[Guest]: but is very weak at the local level, and participatory democracy in particular, both the planning
[Guest]: level and the participatory level, people think of these things as good to have.
[Guest]: They're not just good to have, these are must have, and they are required by law.
[Guest]: Nobody thinks that the state government is good to have.
[Guest]: They accept that the state government is a must have.
[Guest]: Nobody thinks that the central government is just good to have.
[Guest]: They accept that it's a must have.
[Guest]: But there are other things in the law that we simply tell ourselves, these are good to
[Guest]: have, but it's all right if we don't have them, or somehow we seem to be able to go
[Guest]: forward without having them.
[Guest]: If an election was not held to a state assembly on time, that would be quite a decision.
[Unknown]: But if an election is not held to a local council or a planning body, that seems like
[Guest]: okay, it'll sort of drift on, it'll be sorted out by the courts.
[Guest]: We don't have an elected council now here in Bangalore, for example, and while one set
[Guest]: of people are not happy about that, it isn't creating the kind of uproar that the lack
[Guest]: of a state government or the lack of a national government would.
[Guest]: There have even been court decisions that local administration is just administration
[Guest]: and can't even be considered government, which is, these are real challenges, that how we
[Guest]: think about the structure of government and how we participate is more or less central
[Guest]: to what we'll actually get from it.
[Guest]: That we have a very interesting narrative, for example, we think that India is going
[Guest]: to become a superpower and then everybody's going to get educated.
[Guest]: So it's almost like we expect to arrive at a development outcome before the people of
[Guest]: the country become developed, and that's a bizarre notion, but it's quite prevalent that
[Guest]: a lot of people subscribe to that, or even if they don't say it explicitly, they seem
[Guest]: to believe that's how it's going to happen.
[Guest]: So what I think it's worth dwelling on and spending a lot of time thinking about is essentially
[Guest]: this idea of how have we organized ourselves as a society?
[Guest]: Why have we organized ourselves in this way?
[Guest]: Who is it deeply unfair to?
[Guest]: In what ways is it inefficient and just unproductive?
[Guest]: And why are we doing this to ourselves?
[Guest]: We're not doing this to other people, we're doing this to ourselves.
[Guest]: There's a reason why the street outside your house looks the way it does.
[Guest]: That reason is not some imaginary or actual war with a foreign country, or being struck
[Guest]: by an asteroid, or any of those sorts of things.
[Guest]: It's something we have done to ourselves, and therefore I think it's important to be
[Guest]: deliberate in first stopping to do those things to ourselves, and then starting to do another
[Guest]: set of things that can change.
[Guest]: And I really think that urbanization provides a phenomenal opportunity to examine that and
[Guest]: to actually act in that sphere of influence.
[Unknown]: And so this has been the fascination for me, that frankly, I got into urbanization as an
[Guest]: ignoramus.
[Guest]: I was a climate scientist, I didn't know anything about the city except that I lived in it.
[Unknown]: And I've always lived in a big city by a lot, other than nine months when I lived in a small
[Guest]: town in Virginia.
[Guest]: I've always lived in a big city, no city that I've been in had less than a few billion people.
[Guest]: And so in a way, you're thinking that you're comfortable with all of this.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you're constantly reminded that this isn't the way you would go about
[Guest]: doing things in the city, or that you're not happy with many of the outcomes that you see
[Guest]: around you.
[Guest]: And so you can start with simply no more than that as the motivation to get involved.
[Guest]: And for a lot of people today, I think just making things better, whatever they mean by
[Guest]: that phrase, making things better, not in a Trumpian way of let's make America great
[Guest]: again, but really, actually make things better.
[Guest]: A lot of people just get into public issues, primarily with that level of motivation for
[Guest]: what they want to do.
[Guest]: If we can create a way in which that can be persistent, and metric for continuous improvement,
[Guest]: I think you would get a very large number of problem solving people from that you could
[Guest]: do lots and lots of things.
[Guest]: I actually think that if you did that, even governments would be responsive to that.
[Guest]: I know I've worked closely with lots of people in government, both politicians and administrators.
[Guest]: There is a genuine understanding, but they don't have enough allies for the things that
[Guest]: you and I expect them to do.
[Guest]: And so if you were to walk into a government department and offer to work with them to
[Guest]: help do their jobs better, a very large number of people would welcome that.
[Guest]: But if you walk into those same government departments and said, why the hell aren't
[Guest]: you doing your job better, there is a reflexive defensiveness to that.
[Guest]: So in a way, you need to be able to do both.
[Guest]: You need to be able to go and say, these things aren't good enough.
[Guest]: I expect them to be better, but I will also help you make them better.
[Guest]: I think if more of us can come to this balance, while on the one hand, expecting governments
[Guest]: to do better, but on the other hand, accepting that we also have something to contribute
[Guest]: to make that happen, I actually think that within 10 days, everyone in the city could
[Guest]: see themselves becoming a stronger part of the life of their own neighborhood, at least,
[Guest]: and start to make things better.
[Guest]: It's very easy.
[Guest]: It's like what I said earlier in the last conversation, how do you meet strangers?
[Guest]: Just go out on the street.
[Guest]: There are lots of strangers, walk up to one of them and say, hi, it sounds like a really
[Guest]: bizarre thing to do, but it actually does get you to meet strangers if you did that.
[Guest]: So in a way, you have to be sort of goal oriented in a lot of this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: If any of my listeners want to go out on the street right now and meet strangers, kindly
[Amit Varma]: wear a mask at least, you know, I want to dive into the weeds of what you're speaking
[Amit Varma]: about in terms of urban governance and citizen participation in that.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I also want to ask you some broad questions about your philosophy towards
[Amit Varma]: this whole question of governance in general.
[Amit Varma]: But before even that, we'll take a break.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go into the break, I also want to, you know, throw up a bunch of thoughts
[Amit Varma]: that I had when you were speaking about education, which is a subject that, you know, one day
[Amit Varma]: perhaps in a future episode, when we both thought more about it, I'd like to discuss
[Amit Varma]: at length.
[Amit Varma]: First, at an immediate level, we are recording this on October 30th, and I am actually launching
[Amit Varma]: an online podcasting course later today.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, by the time this episode comes out, hopefully many people will have signed
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: I also do, of course, run an online writing class, which has had more than 600 students
[Amit Varma]: since April, since I started it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's interesting, a few years back, that question which you raised, who
[Amit Varma]: should teach?
[Amit Varma]: Who should they teach to?
[Amit Varma]: And also a meta question that comes above that is who should answer these two questions?
[Amit Varma]: And I had a broad sort of startup idea many years ago, which aimed to sort of address
[Amit Varma]: this, which was to kind of build a platform where anybody could teach anything to anyone
[Amit Varma]: and price it at whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And so if a paanwala wanted to teach a five minute thing in Hindi, ki aise shuru karte
[Amit Varma]: hai, this is how you handle the government, this is a stock you need, fine.
[Amit Varma]: Let everybody try whatever they want at whatever price and then let buyers and sellers discover
[Amit Varma]: each other.
[Amit Varma]: And thank goodness I never did that because no entrepreneurial thing I do ever works out.
[Amit Varma]: And part of where that that impetus came from was I remember looking at the homogeneity
[Amit Varma]: of what we are offered in our education, like you pointed out that it makes absolutely no
[Amit Varma]: sense that if you are a certain age, you are studying in a certain standard, and you're
[Amit Varma]: stuck into that kind of rut.
[Amit Varma]: I remember writing a column about I think 11 or 12 years ago about how, you know, after
[Amit Varma]: I saw tare zameen par, how if you go out to a supermarket today, I can find 50 varieties
[Amit Varma]: of shampoo, 40 flavors of potato chips, you know, I'll eventually find something which
[Amit Varma]: suits exactly me, the shampoo that is just right for my, you know, dry keto hair or whatever
[Amit Varma]: it is to that specification.
[Amit Varma]: But in education, sadly, we are all, you know, made to consume sort of the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So this is, I think, something that we take for granted, it is normal, we don't think
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, your thoughts were pretty sort of stimulating to me.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like, you know, maybe our listeners to also think about why we take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, obviously, we see a lot of these online platforms up, but I see this
[Amit Varma]: India platforms like by Jews and whatever, and they are essentially just, you know, providing
[Amit Varma]: the same format of education, and helping you navigate the same system, only the delivery
[Amit Varma]: mechanism is online instead of life.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure that that's, you know, very far reaching or goes far enough, I think there
[Amit Varma]: is a space for young entrepreneurs to recognize that there is just a big hole in the market
[Amit Varma]: in a much broader sense, and most people realize, and maybe do something about solving these
[Amit Varma]: big problems.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, before we go into the break, you know, Lant Pritchett, who you referred
[Amit Varma]: to wrote, you know, one of my favorite papers of the century, called India's flailing state
[Amit Varma]: and something, something, something, but that's where I, you know, first heard the term, India's
[Amit Varma]: flailing state.
[Amit Varma]: And I linked that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And no doubt his insights are also, you know, have informed a lot of my thinking about India,
[Amit Varma]: certainly.
[Amit Varma]: So let's come back and get into the weeds and deeper into this interesting Chinese box.
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know if I should call it a Chinese box.
[Amit Varma]: Could I get into trouble deeper into this new box with many layers after a brief commercial
[Amit Varma]: break?
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote
[Amit Varma]: bags, pouches and home decor items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indian colors.com as colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right on scene for 15% off at Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ashwin Mahesh about urban governance ostensibly, but as tends to happen
[Amit Varma]: in my show, when I'm talking to interesting people who think deeply about many things,
[Amit Varma]: we've gone into different directions, one of which of course was, you know, education
[Amit Varma]: itself.
[Amit Varma]: And Ashwin, when we were in the break, you said you wanted to respond to what I had just
[Amit Varma]: said before the break.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, go ahead.
[Guest]: You know, Tim Marshall wrote an interesting book called Prisoners of Geography about how
[Guest]: a lot of a nation's choices are constrained by geography, terrain in particular, and productivity
[Guest]: of land, things like that.
[Guest]: But you know, you could extend that sort of thinking to a lot of other things too, that
[Guest]: I think even in a city, we are prisoners of our geography, the neighborhoods.
[Guest]: So we tend to think of a lot of things as the accidental circumstance of birth in certain
[Guest]: families, in certain places and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But it continues through the rest of one's life as well, that there is a sort of prisonership
[Guest]: to geography in a lot of things.
[Guest]: You live in a nice neighborhood, you have a set of opportunities that come from merely
[Guest]: living in a nice neighborhood.
[Guest]: In places like America, this has been taken to an extreme.
[Guest]: You live in a nice neighborhood, property taxes fund local education, public education
[Guest]: in a powerful way.
[Guest]: You live in a poor neighborhood, you don't even have the money to teach your kids properly.
[Guest]: And so you have these sorts of traps into which we have let ourselves into.
[Guest]: And a lot of the planning and the administration and implementation of plans and schemes is
[Guest]: not systematic enough about equity in outcomes.
[Guest]: We actually have a lot of attention to economy.
[Guest]: We have a lot of some attention to ecology, increasingly of it, but we don't really have
[Guest]: much attention to equity.
[Guest]: There's a lot of lip service to equity.
[Guest]: There's a lot of talk about what should be and what should not be, but you wouldn't find
[Guest]: a push for equity in actual budgets of governments or actual stances and policies.
[Guest]: So in a way, often governments even make the mistake of saying that we speak on behalf
[Guest]: of the poor, but it's not clear by what achievement they lay claim to that.
[Guest]: You can say that governments have a legitimacy to speak on behalf of the poor, but it's not
[Guest]: clear.
[Guest]: I mean, they have a very large public school system or a public health system, which is
[Guest]: quite abysmal in some way, and probably underserves the poor more than it underserves anybody
[Guest]: else because the poor are often turning to those systems, and yet governments have given
[Guest]: themselves the legitimacy to speak for the poor after having let them down massively
[Guest]: in their own direct lines of opportunity to serve.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think there's a lot of us who are just caught in our situations and being
[Guest]: deliberate about overcoming that prisonership is important to solve any problem because
[Guest]: you are inheriting a lot of things, you're inheriting a past, partly a colonial past
[Guest]: and then administrative infrastructure that didn't change very much when you inherited
[Guest]: that past and imbalance between state market and society in which it was common during
[Guest]: colonial times.
[Guest]: This happened a lot, the instruments of the state, what is particularly designed to favor
[Guest]: certain market outcomes.
[Guest]: So if you inherit that, you're going to get exactly that kind of state even today.
[Guest]: And this is, you can call it what you like, you can call it crony capitalism, you can
[Guest]: call it just a weak state hostage to particular private interests, you can call it all these
[Guest]: things.
[Unknown]: But in many ways, it's just a continuity of something that existed 100 years ago, a
[Guest]: bout which we have not thought deeply enough.
[Guest]: You asked me earlier, what was my sort of starting point for a lot of these things?
[Guest]: I actually think from first principles, I think people have a right to be free.
[Guest]: That this right is not something that the state gives you or me, that we have this right,
[Guest]: that the mere truth of being born has endowed us with that right, and that governments of
[Guest]: any persuasion should not have the right to take that away from us.
[Guest]: And also that this term being free has to mean more than physically free, the freedom
[Guest]: to think and to act in ways that are consistent with what you think, I mean, of course, subject
[Guest]: to not harming others and all those kinds of caveats, but broadly, that it should actually
[Guest]: be possible for liberty and freedom to anchor a democratic society.
[Guest]: And we shouldn't really have to convince ourselves of that again and again.
[Guest]: I think what has happened in the last five years, not just in India, but even globally,
[Guest]: is that an increasing number of people, even in democratic societies, have sort of given
[Guest]: up on this foundation in some way.
[Guest]: You look at what happens in places like Hungary or Poland nowadays, for example, and you wonder,
[Guest]: these are people who have suffered for decades under authoritarian rule, and they seem willing
[Guest]: to flirt with it again today, just two decades after getting out of, you know, Soviet control
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: And what it tells you is that public memory is short about a lot of these things, but
[Guest]: it also tells you that the responses from people are very situational.
[Guest]: They're simply saying yes and no to the set of questions that are put before them.
[Guest]: And it's like, often the answers are like having a diet for the left side of your body.
[Guest]: You can have a diet for the upper body strength, you can have a diet for lower body strength,
[Unknown]: but you can't have a diet for the left side of your body.
[Guest]: That doesn't make any sense.
[Guest]: Too much of the choices that are presented to us in the political arena are really diets
[Guest]: for the one side of our body, and it just is never going to add up.
[Guest]: That constantly reminding ourselves what the foundation for participation in public life,
[Guest]: for foundation for participating in governance is, that's important.
[Guest]: And I think if we did that, we would be more fair to the people around us too.
[Guest]: The idea that a young child begging on the street has a right to liberty, has a right
[Guest]: to a kind of freedom and opportunity.
[Guest]: I think that is, it's a basic decency that I think all of us are capable of mastering.
[Guest]: But somewhere along that journey, we have allowed this to deteriorate or just recede
[Guest]: even into a mere administrative problem, or even a traffic problem.
[Guest]: You find it an annoyance that at a traffic light, you are, quote unquote, disturbed by
[Guest]: such things, or that there's a risk of accidents from such things.
[Guest]: It's kind of bizarre that such suffering is, it doesn't motivate us to go back to first
[Guest]: principles on a lot of things.
[Guest]: And we live, I said this earlier too, we live in India today among the largest concentrations
[Guest]: of poor people in the history of the planet.
[Guest]: You could say it's partly the result of our sheer numbers and all of that stuff, but the
[Guest]: numbers are the result of underdevelopment too, in some way, and the lack of women's
[Guest]: empowerment in particular.
[Guest]: I think in some ways we have to acknowledge where we are and start from that.
[Guest]: And you have to start from the sense that people have rights, and those rights are not
[Guest]: necessarily the ones that the state has given to them, that some rights they have.
[Guest]: You can believe that these are God-given rights, if you were a God-fearing person.
[Guest]: You believe that these are social organization rights that are good to have in a democracy.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter what you think is the foundation for such rights.
[Guest]: It's important to believe that you have those rights, and that not just you, but your friends
[Guest]: and your partners and your relatives and your neighbors, they have those rights too.
[Guest]: But I think too often we explain away non-adherence to those rights as necessary responses to
[Guest]: this problem or that problem.
[Guest]: But I actually think that if we were to more feverishly support people's rights, you'd
[Guest]: actually get many of the development outcomes for which we claim to be suppressing those
[Unknown]: rights.
[Guest]: It's really sad, but fundamentally you can do a lot better by arguments around liberty
[Guest]: than you can through arguments of efficiency.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's one of my bugbears that we tend to behave as if, I mean, the way I look
[Amit Varma]: at the state is again, the Lockean view that the state is there to protect our rights and
[Amit Varma]: our rights precede the state.
[Amit Varma]: The state is an instrument for the protection of our rights and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And instead, how we look at it is we behave as if the state is a maibap and these rights
[Amit Varma]: are given to us by the state, and therefore they are contingent on circumstances and our
[Amit Varma]: behavior and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And it just all goes out of bag.
[Amit Varma]: This is a sort of a fundamental issue there.
[Guest]: It was a simple way to sort of keep reminding yourself of that.
[Guest]: The Republic of India, or whatever, India as an independent country existed before there
[Guest]: was a government of independent India.
[Guest]: So there must obviously have been a time when you had all these rights with or without the
[Guest]: government, but it's quite logical to think that people have rights before the state even
[Guest]: is born.
[Guest]: And in fact, the state is a construction by the people of such a way of working together.
[Guest]: But one of the things, if you see the presentation that I sent you, it talks about three ways
[Guest]: of re-imagining life.
[Guest]: And one of the first things that I say is think like it's 1947.
[Guest]: What I mean by that is that we far too often, we think that the things that have been given
[Guest]: to us at the founding of the nation are substantially immutable.
[Guest]: So in a way, but that's not true at all, that the constitution has had more than 100 amendments.
[Guest]: So in a way, we've got to recognize that every generation has both a right and an obligation
[Guest]: to imagine the way in which it wants to organize itself, both for its own current welfare and
[Guest]: in fairness to future generations.
[Guest]: And therefore, re-imagining the law, re-imagining the constitution, re-imagining even social
[Guest]: organization is both a right and a responsibility.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, we've completely dropped the ball on that and really almost the entirety
[Guest]: of our problem with urbanization today is because of this, that we still live in a country
[Guest]: whose framework for governance is largely rural.
[Guest]: But increasingly the lives of the people are urban and the political and administrative
[Guest]: system are 30 to 40 years behind the reality in catching up to this.
[Guest]: So I mean, I think a very simple thing that our delimitation of constituencies, our delimitation
[Guest]: of constituencies at one level is from 1971, the interstate division of seats in parliament
[Guest]: is from 1971, the intrastate delimitation of constituencies is from 2001, 20 years ago.
[Guest]: In 20 years, at least 15 more percent has been added to the organization of the country,
[Guest]: but that isn't reflected in your state legislatures in any part of the country, except in Delhi,
[Guest]: which is almost entirely urban.
[Guest]: So if you go to a typical large state, what you have is very disproportionate participation
[Guest]: in legislatures by people from rural areas and deep under-representation of urban citizens
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: And I think this is really the core of the problem with urbanization.
[Guest]: We look at areas with very high density of living in very urban areas outside Bangalore
[Guest]: or Chennai or Kolkata, and we call them rural areas.
[Guest]: I mean, if 10,000 people live in 20 acres of land, there's just no way in the world
[Guest]: you can call that a rural area.
[Guest]: But because it says in the law that this is a rural area, and nobody's actually taken
[Guest]: the step to convert that from a rural area to an urban area, and there's a good political
[Guest]: reason for that.
[Guest]: The flow of money into the political system is more decentralized in rural areas than
[Guest]: it is in urban areas.
[Guest]: Therefore, if you are a politician in a panchayat, you would fight like hell to make sure that
[Guest]: it does not get converted into a town council.
[Guest]: Because your ability to influence things in the urban governance system is a lot weaker
[Guest]: than your ability to influence things, for good or bad, in the rural governance system.
[Unknown]: So you have very large, there are villages outside Bangalore, 25,000 people.
[Guest]: There's no way that's a village, but nobody wants to say this is not a village anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get into the weeds and get into detail about all of these things, sort of
[Amit Varma]: a couple of larger questions, and the first of them fits very nicely into the frame of
[Amit Varma]: Imaginist 1947.
[Amit Varma]: Now you were talking about how we take these sort of these structures of government for
[Amit Varma]: granted that we've inherited the past, and from that we've inherited these colonial structures
[Amit Varma]: and this colonial system of government and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But it also strikes me that it's not just, in this case, not just a question of the inertia
[Amit Varma]: of the past, that this is how we've inherited, and so we also inherit certain ways of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: What also strikes me is that the way our state and the way our democracy was designed in
[Amit Varma]: 1947, to use your frame of Imaginist 1947, makes such outcomes inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: Because then what happens is, one, you don't have enough local governance, which is a theme
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure we'll talk about much more as we go along, but two, what you also have is,
[Amit Varma]: you set up this vicious circle between power and money, where it's a democracy, you've
[Amit Varma]: got to win elections.
[Amit Varma]: You know, number one, the state has way more power than it should.
[Amit Varma]: That makes it attractive.
[Amit Varma]: You know, rent seeking is therefore far more aspirational than actually creating value
[Amit Varma]: in the real world and making money that way.
[Amit Varma]: So you want to be part of the state.
[Amit Varma]: What that means is that there is a lust for power.
[Amit Varma]: The only way to get to power, the way our democracy is designed, is through spending
[Amit Varma]: a lot of money.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, where does the money come from?
[Amit Varma]: It comes from, again, crony capitalists who will want an ROI, who will want a return on
[Amit Varma]: investment, which is why, you know, India at various times has been pro-business, but
[Amit Varma]: it has never been pro-markets, because pro-business and pro-markets, as we know, are completely
[Amit Varma]: opposite things that, you know, big money wants to shut down competition so it can continue
[Amit Varma]: unimpeded.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a different sort of tangent.
[Amit Varma]: But so, in a sense, it's not just that we've taken on the baggage of the past, but the
[Amit Varma]: design of the state and the design of our democracy in 1947 sort of makes our current
[Amit Varma]: outcomes A, inevitable and B, almost immutable, because what do you do about this now?
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of responses to this?
[Unknown]: Yeah, so there's a direction and what you're saying is that there's a directionality from
[Guest]: any starting point that inevitably leads only in certain directions.
[Guest]: So I mean, take the question of, here's a little thing you can try.
[Guest]: Ask anybody.
[Guest]: Ask 100 people that you know in the next, whatever, 100 days.
[Guest]: What percentage of your tax would you like to give to your local council, and what percentage
[Guest]: would you like to give to your state government, and what percentage would you like to give
[Guest]: to the national government?
[Unknown]: I guarantee you that on average, you'll find people saying that at least 20% of their tax
[Guest]: money should be given to their local council, but in practice, not even 1 or 2% of people's
[Guest]: taxes go to their local councils.
[Guest]: And this is a kind of an interesting thing, where you have a universal opinion that a
[Guest]: higher percentage of one's taxes should go to a local council, and despite the universal
[Guest]: acceptance of this view, in a democratic society, it is not done.
[Guest]: I mean, think about that.
[Guest]: If the point of democracy, representative democracy, is to take people's preferences
[Guest]: and incorporate them into law and governance, here you have a situation in which the overwhelming
[Guest]: majority of people want something, and the thing that is done is the very opposite of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So somewhere, it tells you that there's a break in this representativeness of the whole
[Guest]: thing.
[Unknown]: Now, the way to break that is not to convince the guys who are holding on to the money to
[Unknown]: give up the money.
[Guest]: They're not going to do it.
[Guest]: The way to do that, in some ways, even though I don't like these kinds of examples, it is
[Guest]: Reagan-esque or Thatcherite in some way, that people with a different imagination of government
[Guest]: itself have to get into government to be able to change this.
[Unknown]: But there's a huge risk attached to that.
[Guest]: Once they get into government, their imaginations of government tend to be a little different
[Guest]: from what they had before they got into government.
[Guest]: There are enough people asking me what happened to Swaraj.
[Guest]: So I actually sort of, in some ways, recognize that there is a trap in this, but I also don't
[Guest]: see any other way forward, that ultimately, if we're going to get out of this directionality
[Guest]: that comes from initially having only a state national government, then having state governments,
[Guest]: then having some kind of quasi-local government.
[Guest]: And in many states, local councils don't really do much.
[Guest]: In Bangalore, the local council doesn't do much.
[Guest]: A very large number of things here are done by parastatals, like your bus company, and
[Guest]: the water board, and the electricity board, and things like that.
[Guest]: And it's a little better in the Western states, Maharashtra and Gujarat.
[Guest]: But even generally around the country, local councils are not very powerful in some way.
[Guest]: And then, of course, you don't have the planning bodies at all, in any independent way.
[Guest]: You don't have the ward councils and the participatory governance at the local level.
[Guest]: And these are also things in which I think the courts are partly to blame.
[Guest]: The courts are repeatedly acquiesced with punting by the government when asked why they're
[Guest]: not doing the things that they're required to do in law.
[Guest]: The government can violate almost any right of the people.
[Guest]: And when it is challenged in the court, they'll give you some explanation.
[Guest]: And the most likely response from the court is, okay, we'll have a new hearing in four
[Guest]: weeks.
[Guest]: I mean, generally, the most common thing that courts in India say is, we'll have a new hearing
[Guest]: in four weeks.
[Guest]: And that's really a very sad reality, that especially when the government is a defendant,
[Guest]: typically, they can go on saying that for years together.
[Guest]: I mean, the 74th Amendment was passed in 1992.
[Guest]: Why isn't there a Metapolitan Planning Committee for Bengaluru 28 years later?
[Guest]: It can't be that it takes 28 years to implement the Constitution of India.
[Guest]: But if you go to the High Court of Karnataka and say, why is this not being implemented?
[Guest]: They'll send a notice to the government of Karnataka and the government will send a response
[Guest]: and the court will say, let's have a hearing in four weeks.
[Guest]: And after a while, the guys who are asking the questions, tell themselves, I can write
[Guest]: myself this notice myself without going through the sharing.
[Guest]: So in a way, the state is not merely more powerful than market and society.
[Guest]: The state, using the resources of market and society, has made itself more resilient to
[Guest]: the status quo as well.
[Guest]: And that's really the problem.
[Guest]: It's only when you get catastrophic things like a pandemic, that all of this stands set
[Guest]: up like the emperor's new clothes in some way.
[Guest]: So in a way, today, you can see the nakedness of the whole thing.
[Guest]: But in quote unquote, normal times, it seems like there's a way to punt everything to the
[Guest]: next question.
[Guest]: And that's really the problem that you're not going to get solutions if you keep punting
[Amit Varma]: the question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, speaking about the pandemic sort of opening our eyes, a few months back, just
[Amit Varma]: as the sort of lockdowns had begun, I wrote a column about how one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: has done is it's kind of made more visceral what we otherwise normalized and took for
[Amit Varma]: granted, which is that, you know, the big disaster here is not just a pandemic, but
[Amit Varma]: there is also the disaster of the flailing state, as it were, I think I quoted Richard
[Amit Varma]: in that column, that, you know, we can speak about the harm that COVID-19 is doing.
[Amit Varma]: But 3000 children die in India of starvation every day.
[Amit Varma]: And in what way is that also not a disaster that we must tackle?
[Amit Varma]: And in what way is that also not a sort of a manmade disaster, as it were, and largely
[Amit Varma]: manmade.
[Amit Varma]: So I, you know, don't feel bad using that gender specific term.
[Amit Varma]: So I had a question for you, which I was actually saving for later, but you brought it up.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll kind of ask it now, which is like, first of all, you spoke about people might
[Amit Varma]: go into government for Reagan-esque and Thatcher-esque reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you almost used those terms in half embarrassment, but I don't think they're
[Amit Varma]: bad words at all.
[Amit Varma]: But question here is that, you know, you've also spoken a lot in our last episode and
[Amit Varma]: otherwise and even later today, I'm sure about how citizens must get involved in the task
[Amit Varma]: of governance.
[Amit Varma]: You cannot leave it to the state.
[Amit Varma]: There is a role for citizens.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, there's a mandated space for it, which is made in our constitution,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out at the start of the episode.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question here is that, to what extent must a citizen become a political animal?
[Amit Varma]: Because I see that then there is an added danger in getting entangled in the political
[Amit Varma]: process and that then changing, you know, what the citizen got in there for the first
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, we've all heard the old saw of power corrupts, but politics also corrodes
[Amit Varma]: character, you know, and we spoke a lot about like the Aam Aadmi Party, which you're a part
[Amit Varma]: of and what has happened to them in Delhi in our last episode, but leave that aside
[Amit Varma]: at a general philosophical level.
[Amit Varma]: Does it then become a problem that as citizens, perhaps for good reasons, or perhaps those
[Amit Varma]: good reasons are the rationalization for other instincts, but as citizens get more and more
[Amit Varma]: involved in government, is it a danger that their incentives changing along the way also
[Amit Varma]: changes their behavior and what they got in for?
[Guest]: Of course, there's the danger, but it's, I mean, let's take an analogous thing.
[Guest]: Let's say you're reading philosophy, you know, you read all sorts of philosophers and often
[Guest]: with very, you could read Kant and you could read Milton and you could read, whatever.
[Guest]: There are big differences between philosophical positions and you don't think by and large
[Guest]: that reading about all of them could prejudice you towards one of the wrong choices.
[Guest]: You accept that reading about all of them is part of an education about whatever stance
[Guest]: you eventually come to.
[Guest]: You don't decide beforehand that you're going to be utilitarian simply because you've read
[Guest]: Milton.
[Guest]: You're reading about utilitarianism to understand utilitarianism, you might read about something
[Guest]: else to understand that.
[Guest]: I think public life is like that, that yes, it comes with the entanglement that you referred
[Guest]: to, but the entanglement is part of the education.
[Guest]: The entanglement is not part of the stance that you necessarily need to come to.
[Guest]: I actually think it's much easier for me to work with people if I understand their different
[Guest]: motivations for engaging the same problems that I engage with, with whatever motivation
[Guest]: I have.
[Guest]: One of the best conversations I've ever had on watershed development in Karnataka was
[Guest]: with Basaraj Bommai, who was Water Resources Minister in the BJP government.
[Guest]: He really knows his stuff, right?
[Guest]: It may be that his political persuasion is very different from mine, but you know, we're
[Guest]: talking about water resources development and watershed management.
[Guest]: A, you should be able to have that conversation independent of things like that, and second,
[Guest]: you should be able to say that even if our political persuasions are different, that's
[Guest]: not a reason not to have this conversation.
[Guest]: I think Elkia Dhawani said this in, I'm going to say 10 years ago almost, he and Atalji
[Guest]: were far closer to the other side of the political spectrum than today's political persons are
[Guest]: to other persuasions.
[Guest]: They do know each other, but somehow I think we don't really have the continuity of engagement
[Guest]: across the political aisle, which is a necessary part, I mean, that's why you have the assembly,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You don't have an assembly only for those who win the elections.
[Guest]: The assembly is a place for both who are in government and for people in opposition, and
[Guest]: if we did not accept that there is a health to the process of being opposed and persuaded
[Guest]: by others, you wouldn't have the assemblies be the way they are, right?
[Guest]: So I think the constitution is quite clear that contestation is part of the health of
[Guest]: a democracy.
[Guest]: So I don't think we should worry about that, and with all contestation comes the risk that
[Guest]: you become attached to the winning side, or you would at least like your side of that
[Guest]: contest to win.
[Guest]: I think that's normal, and it's not something to be afraid of, and I think what disciplines
[Guest]: this is not your victory, but the certainty that after your victory there would be somebody
[Guest]: to contest it.
[Guest]: So in a way, I wouldn't feel too smug about winning this battle or that.
[Guest]: It is a permanent battle, and it's something you have to engage with again and again.
[Guest]: Being on the sidelines more or less ensures that you're never going to be on the winning
[Guest]: side.
[Guest]: I think it's better for people to want to be on the winning side for a few years at
[Guest]: a time at least, and in other years to be part of the side that brings health to the
[Guest]: overall thing.
[Guest]: I think that's a much better stance to take, but the thing I've seen that dissuades people
[Guest]: more is that they believe they have to do a lot to be useful in public life.
[Guest]: People think, you know, I'm a working professional, or I have a day job, or whatever.
[Guest]: I have other commitments that I'm supposed to meet, and at the end of meeting all of
[Guest]: those commitments, I have neither the bandwidth nor the mental energy to engage in public
[Guest]: issues.
[Guest]: The sad part is that a very large part of the things that you are trying to sort of
[Guest]: take care of in private life are being done in private life only because the public systems
[Guest]: are not good enough to take care of them.
[Guest]: If you really had a well-funded and well-run public education system, you probably wouldn't
[Guest]: need as much money to send your child to a private school.
[Guest]: So in a way, there is a tighter link between what we think of as a public problem and our
[Guest]: private life than we actually recognize, that, you know, if your scooter goes over a pothole
[Guest]: and you tip over and have an accident, and you're out of action for six weeks, that really
[Guest]: is a public problem that has become a private problem.
[Guest]: So you can tell yourself that you didn't have the bandwidth to insist on better roads, but
[Guest]: six weeks in a hospital is a lot of bandwidth that you didn't want to have either.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think these problems are not so distant from each other as people tell
[Guest]: themselves they are.
[Guest]: I think public and private problems overlap a lot, and by addressing public problems more
[Guest]: energetically, we would actually give ourselves more latitude in private life too.
[Guest]: So there's a schizophrenia about this too, which is that people who say they don't have
[Guest]: the bandwidth for this, they often feel quite empowered about their private lives, that
[Guest]: they are achieving this or that in their job, they're buying a house, they're buying a car,
[Guest]: they're moving up the promotion ranks in their companies, and yet they sort of tell themselves
[Guest]: that they don't really have much to contribute to public life, which is kind of schizophrenic
[Guest]: in some sense, that they're not even telling you that they won't do it, they're actually
[Guest]: telling you that they can't do it.
[Guest]: This word can't is something that they eschew in private life, but it comes out quite readily
[Guest]: in public life.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, from what you're saying, it's a fairly profound point, and it leads me to think that
[Amit Varma]: perhaps the apathy of the people comes from the apathetic state, and we don't often see
[Amit Varma]: this link that the public problem, the pothole over which our scooter trips and we spend
[Amit Varma]: six weeks in hospital, that it's something that our participation could help.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll dig a little deeper into that apathy as we kind of get into it.
[Amit Varma]: My one final big question before we kind of get into the weeds is I was very curious about
[Amit Varma]: the philosophical approach to urban planning in a sense that one of the finest biographies
[Amit Varma]: I've read, which I'm sure you must have read as well as the Power Broker by Robert Caro,
[Amit Varma]: which was a biography of Robert Moses, a man who planned and built much of New York as
[Amit Varma]: it were, and for much of his career, Moses was in opposition with Jane Jacobs.
[Amit Varma]: And if I can briefly and perhaps to simply sum up what those opposing schools of thought
[Amit Varma]: were, Moses was all about, okay, we should have a master plan for the city and flyover
[Amit Varma]: should be here and this is how it should go.
[Amit Varma]: And you plan that from the top down, though at a city level, but from the top down and
[Amit Varma]: you execute it.
[Amit Varma]: And Jacobs's whole point was that look, cities evolve organically, and anything you do coercively
[Amit Varma]: to force a particular vision on how a city is growing will harm the city and will harm
[Amit Varma]: its inhabitants.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I don't necessarily, you know, see a contradiction here when you talk about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, planning at a local level, because it does seem to me that, you know, that in this
[Amit Varma]: trade off of how much you want to plan from the top down and how much you want to, how
[Amit Varma]: much the citizen should be empowered at the local level to have a voice on how the city
[Amit Varma]: is actually growing.
[Amit Varma]: I think there is probably a sweet meeting point somewhere where these two come together
[Amit Varma]: and citizens remain empowered.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you can get some planning done.
[Amit Varma]: Is there that sweet point?
[Amit Varma]: What is your thinking on sort of this being these sort of different ways of thinking about
[Amit Varma]: the problem?
[Amit Varma]: And does that then, you know, at what scale do you have that sweet point?
[Amit Varma]: And at what scale do you say that, no, top down thinking simply doesn't work here?
[Guest]: Well, here's how I would put it, there is a sweet meeting point, but neither Moses nor
[Guest]: Jacobs would believe that.
[Guest]: And that's important that the sweet meeting point exists because both of them don't believe
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Therefore, we cannot make it the purpose of a Jacobs-Moses conversation to arrive at that
[Guest]: meeting point.
[Guest]: We actually have to have the confidence that such meeting points arise naturally from the
[Guest]: stringent positions of a Moses or a Jacobs.
[Guest]: And I think that's important to recognize.
[Guest]: And maybe that's part of the difficulty, that fundamentally we're too often trying to ask
[Guest]: the question, this is a different kind of who problem.
[Guest]: We take a guy who is the mayor of the city, and then you say, okay, how can we make him
[Guest]: do ABC?
[Guest]: Completely unmindful of the fact that the forces that have brought him to be the mayor
[Guest]: of the city have nothing to do with ABC.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think you have to accept that good median outcomes are quite often the result
[Guest]: of contested positions that are not as close to the median as one might like it to be.
[Guest]: I mean, look at Biden's candidacy, it's kind of odd that in a primary process that is replete
[Guest]: with extremism, both in the Democratic Party and in the Republican Party, you get two very
[Guest]: different sets of candidates.
[Guest]: In one process, you get a Donald Trump, who is basically farther right than anybody else
[Guest]: in his party.
[Guest]: So in fact, he's being dragged left by his own people, ironically.
[Guest]: But then you get Joe Biden, who's probably also farther right than his own primary voters,
[Guest]: at least.
[Unknown]: And those primary voters are making a different calculation, that if you put up the wrong
[Guest]: way, if you put up a Sanders, he might not win the actual election.
[Guest]: He might win the primary, but he might not win the actual election.
[Guest]: So I think the way people think about this is that they understand that their choices
[Guest]: have an immediate stamp of approval for a certain position, but they also understand
[Guest]: that the stamp of approval has to be modulated by many, many such stamps from other people.
[Guest]: And partly, if we taught democracy better, if we actually taught public problem solving,
[Guest]: most kids would know this instinctively.
[Guest]: Most kids would continue to care deeply about something and accept that things can still
[Guest]: be different, because others also care deeply about something else.
[Guest]: But what we have now is a situation in which people care deeply about the thing that they
[Guest]: care about, but they have no exposure and understanding of the things that others care
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: And so that actually leads to a kind of polarization that is unnecessary.
[Guest]: Yesterday, I was talking to somebody who was setting up a new public policy school.
[Guest]: And we were talking about, you know, it's all very fine to say I have a graduate program
[Guest]: for 60 students that really teaches them hands-on interventions in government.
[Guest]: But broadly, I think we have to start with the view that governance is too important
[Guest]: to be left to the government.
[Guest]: That in a way, you have to say that ordinary people, children, and young adults, and adults
[Guest]: all have a role to play in governance, that governance actually begins with self-governance.
[Guest]: And if you did not have self-governance, you cannot have even an expectation of governance
[Guest]: beyond that.
[Guest]: It is only by doing the thing that you can, that you acquire both the capacity and the
[Guest]: right to go to somebody in public office and say, if I can do these things myself, what
[Guest]: on earth are you doing after being paid to do this?
[Guest]: So in a way, I think the minute you accept that you have a role to play in strengthening
[Guest]: governance as a citizen, it becomes a lot easier to work with a lot of other people
[Guest]: for those same outcomes.
[Guest]: And in my experience, I would say that definitely in this city, the people that have actually
[Guest]: worked closely with public officials will all tell you that there is a subset of people
[Guest]: in public office who want to do the right thing for the right reason.
[Guest]: They just don't have enough allies in society to make that happen, that they're actually
[Guest]: hoping that more people from society will stand up and say this should be done and that
[Guest]: should not be done, because such positions would empower them inside their own organizations.
[Unknown]: Because if you look at the nitty-gritty, I used to work in BMTC for the longest time.
[Guest]: I was a special advisor when we did all those big, thin buses and all of that stuff, and
[Guest]: direction orientation of the bus system.
[Guest]: And there was one set of people in BMTC who instinctively understood and wanted direction
[Guest]: orientation.
[Guest]: They believed that it would bring greater efficiencies of performance, and that with
[Guest]: fewer buses, you would actually serve more people in certain routes if you deployed them
[Guest]: correctly.
[Guest]: But there was another set of people that just didn't believe that and were hostile to it.
[Guest]: Some of them didn't believe that because they didn't get the mathematics of it, but some
[Guest]: of them didn't believe that because they were reluctant to simply concede that someone in
[Guest]: a junior position could have an idea that's better than someone in a senior position.
[Guest]: So you have to work with that dynamic and take people along in a situation like that.
[Guest]: I remember once there was a DTO, I don't know what exactly it stands for, I'm going to say
[Guest]: Deputy Transport Officer or something like that, Transportation Officer, something like
[Guest]: that, who once told me that the thing that we really appreciated during the years we
[Guest]: did all that is that people from outside of BMTC, outside of government even, were willing
[Guest]: to come into this office and work with us to make things better.
[Guest]: And I've seen that in department after department, even with minister after minister, right?
[Guest]: I mean, many ministers, I remember an event last December that the Deputy Chief Minister
[Guest]: had organized on Atalji's birthday, I think they celebrated in the party as Good Governance
[Guest]: Day.
[Guest]: It is also Christmas Day, but they sort of celebrated as Good Governance Day.
[Guest]: And there was a collection of, you know, departmental heads from different civic agencies that was
[Guest]: called to an event, I'm going to say one of the larger auditoriums in the city, I forget
[Guest]: which one, and they were sort of literally just going through, and a few of us were moderators
[Guest]: of the different sessions of the event, and I happened to be the moderator on the session
[Guest]: on utilities, perhaps with water and power and things like that.
[Guest]: And every department, typically, if you go to a department and ask what it's doing, they
[Guest]: will make you a very nice presentation of all the inputs that they are providing, and
[Guest]: with not nearly as much to show for all the outcomes that you were expecting.
[Guest]: And so you have to cut off that conversation very early.
[Guest]: And you have to say, look, I have a very simple question, why are you not supplying water
[Guest]: to my house?
[Guest]: That's the question, right?
[Guest]: Why are you not supplying water to half the people in the city?
[Guest]: What do you care about my house, right?
[Guest]: You have to start with that.
[Guest]: And the answer to that question cannot be that BWSSB was established several decades
[Guest]: ago and started laying pipelines at a certain pace with a certain budget, and all of that's
[Guest]: all BS in some way.
[Guest]: Of course, it's true, but it's still BS.
[Guest]: And the reason it's BS is there's a rowdy shooter down the street who runs a mafiosi
[Guest]: tanker who's able to deliver water to my house.
[Guest]: I mean, a guy who is completely not empowered at all by any state apparatus or state machinery
[Guest]: is able to do the thing that a fully empowered board for the supply of water is unable to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That's a pretty big indictment of the system.
[Guest]: Forget about what your difficulties are.
[Guest]: You are saying that with all the power and resources of a state, you are unable to do
[Guest]: the thing that some random guy is able to do literally on the side, outside of the law
[Guest]: even.
[Guest]: So why is that?
[Guest]: And I think by asking that question first, you can take away the needless deflection
[Guest]: that comes from saying, here's how our pipeline program is going and here's how our budgets
[Guest]: are for this year and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But I think we have to work with an imagination of government that starts from outcomes.
[Guest]: To say all children have the right to go to a school and achieve a basic level of proficiency
[Guest]: in reading, writing, arithmetic, whatever it is, some five things, right?
[Guest]: All children have the right to learn for their careers, the things that truly interest them.
[Guest]: If you started from those things, you could ask whether the schools are doing that.
[Guest]: And you could also ask what other ways of doing that could be if the schools are not
[Guest]: doing that.
[Guest]: But if you don't, if you instead say, look, if you go to the BDA, for example, the Development
[Guest]: Authority in your city, the DDA, the BDAs, MMDA, CMDA, wherever you are, the DAs will
[Guest]: all tell you that they are going to build 50,000 houses this year.
[Guest]: And they'll tell you that it's a good thing, they're going to build 50,000 houses this
[Unknown]: year.
[Guest]: But if you say, what is the demand for houses in your city this year?
[Guest]: And the answer to that question is 750,000.
[Guest]: And then they want to tell you they're going to build 50,000 houses.
[Guest]: Your obvious next question would be, what is the matter with you?
[Guest]: Who is going to build the other 700,000 houses?
[Guest]: So I think the problem with our stance to governance, the passive stance of too many
[Guest]: people to governance, is that there is a tremendous disconnect between what is done, or what is
[Guest]: being done and what is needed to be done.
[Guest]: Even the smallest thing can be presented as an example of what is needed to be done.
[Guest]: But the fact that it is small only emerges by comparing it with what is needed.
[Guest]: And that's what we're not able to do, that this seems like a detail that ordinary people
[Guest]: are unable to grasp in any sense, because it is a detail, it is a detail.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, we have not allowed ourselves familiarity with details, and we want good
[Guest]: outcomes without familiarity with the details.
[Guest]: And I'm really sorry about this, but that's not going to happen.
[Guest]: Societies that don't grapple with the details cannot have a reasonable expectation of good
[Guest]: outcomes.
[Guest]: The details are critically important to good outcomes.
[Guest]: And so when we tell ourselves that this is a level of detail I can't engage with, it's
[Guest]: equivalent to saying, those good outcomes are not that important to me, that I'm willing
[Amit Varma]: to engage with.
[Amit Varma]: So when you were talking about BDA, DDA, all of these different DAs, I was just thanking
[Amit Varma]: God there's no PDA, Podcast Development Authority, because I would never get a license from them
[Amit Varma]: to do my podcast.
[Amit Varma]: It's probably coming.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Be scared, Mr. Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Be very scared.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, just speaking of our fear of details, and it's what Public Choice Service
[Amit Varma]: would call rational ignorance, that, you know, because, you know, your willingness to delve
[Amit Varma]: into the details of anything, it will be proportional to that process, that effort being useful
[Amit Varma]: to you.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, because most of us can't affect the actions of government, or so we think,
[Amit Varma]: we don't delve into details, and that's what they call rational ignorance.
[Amit Varma]: But it also strikes me that some of this apathy is actually also logical, because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's not that people don't want to get involved in governance outside of their everyday lives.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, during the pandemic, it's become a meme how housing societies have suddenly sprung
[Amit Varma]: into actions.
[Amit Varma]: And I've, you know, even in my own housing society, I see, you know, power corrupting
[Amit Varma]: and all kinds of crazy things happening.
[Amit Varma]: So people do get involved outside of their professions and personal lives.
[Amit Varma]: But in local government, I can see why that would not happen, because there is, and Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajgopalan spoke about it very well in an episode on urban governance, she did a long
[Amit Varma]: time back with me, there is this disconnect between power and accountability, that just
[Amit Varma]: looking at the example of Mumbai and Maharashtra, for example, that, you know, the people who
[Amit Varma]: actually have the power to make Mumbai a better city to live in and bring about great outcomes
[Amit Varma]: are not accountable to me, they're more looking at rural votes and all of that, and my vote
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter to them.
[Amit Varma]: And my vote would matter to people at a municipal level, the ward councillor or whatever that
[Amit Varma]: is, I don't even know what those designations are, or who those people are.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I don't know is that they might be accountable to me and my vote might make
[Amit Varma]: a difference, but they have no power to actually do anything.
[Amit Varma]: So take me a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: So one, is this an accurate summation of a structural problem that we have in our government?
[Amit Varma]: And two, give me a historical sense of this, that how has this kind of evolved?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you sent me this excellent white paper called A New Urban India a few days ago before
[Amit Varma]: we set up this episode.
[Amit Varma]: And that has a lot of background on this, our urban governance legacy, so to say, and
[Amit Varma]: then the role that the 74th amendment tried to, the changes it tried to bring about, but
[Amit Varma]: we are still far from really getting there.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of the history of these structural issues.
[Guest]: We'll get to that.
[Guest]: Before that, I want to say something short in response to what you asked.
[Guest]: Your vote is a kind of voice.
[Guest]: If it is the only time you give voice to your voice, then it's not very powerful.
[Guest]: But if there are other times too, in which you're giving voice to your voice, then your
[Guest]: vote is actually quite a bit more powerful.
[Guest]: If you, for example, just as an experiment, even a gedankenexperiment, not even a real
[Guest]: one, if you were to say that before the next election, I'm going to write to 200 people
[Guest]: that I know that live in my locality and tell them who I'm going to vote for and why.
[Guest]: Write wrong.
[Guest]: Leave that.
[Guest]: If you actually took that step, the guy who thinks your vote is not that important will
[Guest]: come to you to influence that communication.
[Guest]: And what I'm trying to point out is the vote is a kind of voice, that it is by continuously
[Guest]: having that voice that your vote gains the full power that it is vested with.
[Guest]: That merely pressing a button on election day is not adequate to gain that full capacity
[Guest]: for your voice.
[Guest]: So that's something to think about.
[Guest]: There's a whole bunch of other things that need to be done.
[Guest]: Probably there are four commissions in India that have all failed to do their job.
[Guest]: If these four commissions do their job properly, a lot of things can improve really quickly.
[Guest]: Two of them don't exist at all, so you can't even blame them for not doing their job because
[Guest]: they don't really, quote unquote, even exist.
[Guest]: So you can blame somebody else for not even keeping these in existence.
[Guest]: The first is the election commission, everybody's legend now, the extent of failure in the election
[Guest]: commission.
[Guest]: So I won't go into it too much.
[Guest]: But the two commissions that matter the most in the Indian urban context are the Municipalization
[Guest]: Commission and the Delimitation Commission, and these are both important entities.
[Guest]: The Municipalization Commission is supposed to decide when an area has transformed by
[Guest]: some measure from being rural to urban, and therefore is not any more governed under the
[Guest]: 73rd Amendment of the Constitution, which applies to rural governments, but is instead
[Guest]: governed under the 74th Amendment of the Constitution, which applies to urban areas.
[Guest]: So municipalization is something that doesn't really exist in a continuous way.
[Guest]: States tend to set them up at their whim and fancy, and those commissions often make large
[Guest]: numbers of exceptions to the rules for municipalizing an area, so that even if it says that an agglomeration
[Guest]: with more than 5,000 residents should be treated as a small town, incorporated town, you will
[Guest]: still have scenarios in which there are villages with 25,000 people.
[Guest]: And there's no good explanation for why that is, because it's a completely political process
[Guest]: of deciding when an area is no longer village-franchised, but is actually a town council at some level.
[Guest]: And this also undercounts and under-represents the extent of urbanization in India.
[Guest]: I'm sure there are states in India that are more than 60-65% urban, but the broad narrative
[Guest]: about urbanization in India is that we are somewhere at around 30-35%.
[Guest]: That is probably at least a 15% undercount across the country.
[Guest]: And this has implications, because many budgets are divided between rural and urban schemes
[Guest]: in ratios that are decided by such classification.
[Guest]: So if you decide that one-third of the state is urban, you would give one-third of the
[Guest]: budget to urban stock.
[Guest]: But if you decide that one-half of the state is urban, one-half of the budget would go
[Guest]: to addressing urban problems.
[Guest]: So the political class, which is now dominated by rural politics, has a vested interest in
[Guest]: slowing down and delaying municipalization itself, because municipalization effectively
[Guest]: is a flow of money away from systems that they are familiar with, money and power.
[Guest]: So this is one problem, that the municipalization does not happen periodically and predictably.
[Guest]: But it is completely subject to the whims and fancies of state governments.
[Guest]: The second commission that also should exist in a continuous fashion, but does not again
[Guest]: exist in a continuous fashion, is a delimitation commission.
[Guest]: A delimitation commission is supposed to say that the population of a certain local governance
[Guest]: area, like a municipal council or a village concierge, is changing, and that subdivisions
[Guest]: of wards within that municipality have to reflect the most recent distribution of people
[Guest]: in that area.
[Guest]: And therefore, to give roughly each voter equal voice through their vote in elections.
[Guest]: But this too does not exist, the current municipal council, the one whose term just ended in
[Guest]: February, its ward boundaries were actually based on the 2001 census, just 20 years ago.
[Guest]: So, and you might say that's a legacy of having done it this way in 2010, but we're about
[Guest]: to do in 2011, in 2021, we're about to set up a set of boundaries based on the 2011 census.
[Guest]: Knowing fully well, the 3 million people have moved to the city, mostly into the outer wards
[Guest]: during that time.
[Guest]: It's almost like we pretend that this, even the census of India today, does make projections
[Guest]: for intervening years, there is a 2011 census and a 2021 census, but it's not like there
[Guest]: is no data for 2020.
[Guest]: So there's no reason why in 2020, you have to work with 2011 data.
[Guest]: But a political system that is comfortable with the past arrangement will always pick
[Guest]: the oldest possible data set that it can work with, and for whatever decision that is made
[Unknown]: in the present.
[Guest]: So you're going to get in every municipality, a huge gap between the change in population
[Guest]: driven by urbanization, especially the largest cities, the largest cities are having insane
[Guest]: numbers of people.
[Guest]: I mean, 800 to 1000 people come to Bangalore every day, net, right?
[Guest]: So during the course of your show, about 100 more people are going to become Bangaloreans,
[Unknown]: right?
[Guest]: And if the show were being done in Delhi, that number would be 1000 or 1100 people per
[Guest]: day, more than another 30% more.
[Guest]: So in a way, we're looking at a situation where very large numbers of people are moving
[Guest]: to the larger metropolitan areas, these metropolitan areas continue to be governed through really
[Guest]: unwieldy and large municipal councils.
[Guest]: I remember one conversation with a municipal commissioner, who was fortunate enough to
[Guest]: serve several years as a municipal commissioner, even our current commissioner has actually
[Guest]: been in office for quite some time.
[Guest]: But I think it's a safe bet that he's moving to more than half or two thirds of the wards
[Guest]: in the city, because the nature of the job is such that you can actually traverse, understand
[Guest]: and govern a very large city in any meaningful way.
[Guest]: But we have not yet become comfortable with small government.
[Guest]: I mean, the Thatcherite Reaganist argument is that you need to be comfortable with small
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: And their way of talking about small government is that you don't, you know, the government
[Guest]: doesn't have too many rights and too much people to enforce those rights.
[Guest]: But I'm saying we don't even meet the basic standard of a small government, our governments
[Guest]: are not even close enough to the people that we consider physically small.
[Guest]: That if you live in a city of 13 million people, represented by a single council, the very
[Guest]: act of being organized in that way creates distance between you and the voter and the
[Guest]: council, which is actually never going to be helpful.
[Guest]: But are you willing to say that municipal councils should not really be more than a
[Guest]: million people or 2 million people, that a large metropolitan area like Mumbai or Delhi
[Guest]: should have 5, 6, 8, 10 municipalities within them?
[Guest]: So I actually think that because we don't ask those questions, we don't get to the answers
[Guest]: for those things.
[Unknown]: It's unfortunate, but that's how it is.
[Guest]: So the municipalization and delimitation slows down and delays the voice of urban citizens.
[Guest]: And the very act of delaying the voice of urban citizens puts you in a development deficit.
[Guest]: And you're always scrambling to overcome that deficit.
[Guest]: And that's really been the history of urbanization across the country again and again and again.
[Guest]: The only place, ironically, where they tried to sort of keep pace with this to some extent
[Guest]: was Bengal.
[Guest]: And you could put that down partly to communist rule, perhaps, that they actually had in the
[Guest]: Kolkata metropolitan area, many, many 30-odd municipal councils, whereas everywhere else
[Guest]: there are fewer than half a dozen, even today, even in Mumbai.
[Guest]: I don't know if there are more than 7 or 8 municipal councils in a very large area.
[Guest]: Delhi has four, Bangalore still has one, Hyderabad is talking about making it 7 or 3 or 4.
[Guest]: Really, these are areas that could easily have multiple municipal councils and an overarching
[Guest]: layer of planning across those municipal councils.
[Guest]: If you go to Metro Manila, just as an example, in a developing country, if you go to Metro
[Guest]: Manila, you will find 15, 20 cities within what you call Manila.
[Guest]: And there is a Metro Manila planning body, which works across all of those.
[Guest]: The guy that you call the Mayor of London, I forget what his name is, he's actually not
[Guest]: an administrative mayor, he's a planning mayor.
[Guest]: The Livingstons and the Boris Johnsons are all planning mayors.
[Guest]: They did not actually, except for police and transport for London, they were not really
[Guest]: involved in the administration of any of those things.
[Guest]: Many other things in the city, those were left to the boroughs of London.
[Guest]: And there are 33 boroughs in London.
[Guest]: Most people don't realize that there are 33 boroughs and the mayor is just a planning
[Guest]: mayor.
[Guest]: He's in charge of something called the Greater London Authority, he's not the administrative
[Guest]: head of any of the boroughs.
[Guest]: So in a way, the Constitution of India does provide for a planning layer across multiple
[Guest]: municipalities.
[Guest]: And if you thought of this correctly, you could even set this up.
[Guest]: And here's another downside of the historical legacy.
[Guest]: In every district, you have a Zilla Parishad, it's kind of an interesting thing.
[Guest]: A Zilla Parishad in the Panchayati Raj system is the highest tier of a multi-tiered rural
[Guest]: governance system.
[Guest]: So you have the Gram Panchayat, then you have the Mandal Panchayat, sometimes you have the
[Guest]: Taluk Panchayat as well.
[Guest]: And then you have a Zilla Parishad at the highest level, which effectively is a representative
[Guest]: amalgamation of all the sort of lower panchayats in the city with representation from each
[Guest]: of them.
[Guest]: You don't even have the equivalent for the urban areas.
[Guest]: There is no Zilla Urban Council, there's no District Urban Council, instead what you have
[Guest]: is a District Commissioner, who's typically a 27-year-old who passed the IAS exam four
[Unknown]: years ago, maybe if you're fortunate he's 31 years old.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to say is that we have completely substituted representative democracy
[Guest]: at the district level with mere public administration in urban areas primarily, whereas what you
[Guest]: really should have is a Zilla Parishad that is from both the urban and the rural areas
[Guest]: together.
[Unknown]: There's no reason, this is what I mean by saying this is like a diet for the left side
[Unknown]: of your body.
[Unknown]: You've got a Zilla Parishad that's somehow supposed to make the village areas better.
[Guest]: While you don't have any system in place for the urban areas at all, you will get a kind
[Guest]: of grotesque kind of arm-wrestler out of this, who could easily have his own left side defeat
[Guest]: his right side.
[Guest]: And that's inevitably what ends up happening, that rather than building oneself up to be
[Guest]: overall strong, we imagine some selective strength in a way that is only useful to defeat
[Guest]: ourselves again and again.
[Guest]: So the structure of government itself is now anti-urban, it's not just standing in the
[Guest]: way, it's willfully anti-urban, and we have to understand that, that this is not merely
[Guest]: the result of that structure, it's the result of saying we don't really want a transfer
[Guest]: of power from rural governance to urban governance, and this is in some sense pacified by the
[Guest]: romanticism around villages from the past, dating back to Gandhi's unfortunate comment
[Guest]: about villagers.
[Guest]: I'm much more of an Ambedkarite in thinking about villagers, but even apart from that,
[Guest]: I think it is now important to say people are voting with their feet.
[Guest]: So we tend to think of voting as something that happens only at a ballot box, but people
[Guest]: vote with their wallets and they vote with their feet too, and the voting with their
[Guest]: feet is now telling you what they prefer, but the political system is highly unresponsive
[Guest]: to how people vote with their feet, and this is the biggest gap in our response to urbanization
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: It is happening, the political system is not recognizing that it is happening, the reason
[Guest]: it is not recognizing it, the reasons are political, and because that recognition is
[Guest]: left to the very people whose political interests run contrary to reality, you're not going
[Guest]: to get this outcome.
[Guest]: So this becomes the Chakra view, you can recognize it, you can go into it, but it's not easy
[Guest]: to come out of it, and Arjuna is distracted.
[Guest]: So you know, you keep sending a poor young warrior to fight lonely battles in these places.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I love the image of feeding only the left side of the body, and India does seem
[Amit Varma]: to be a little bit like an arm wrestler, which is wrestling with itself and, you know, twisting
[Amit Varma]: itself into grotesque shapes as it both wins and loses at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: Some thoughts from this one, of course, to sort of, you know, mention an interesting
[Amit Varma]: paradox, which is you brought up the Reaganite, Thatcherite conception of the small state,
[Amit Varma]: and in some senses, India is both too small a state and too big a state, it's too small
[Amit Varma]: a state in the sense that we don't even do the basic things properly, which a state should
[Amit Varma]: do, like provide the rule of law and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And we don't even do those.
[Amit Varma]: So you could argue that in those ways, we are too small.
[Amit Varma]: But you could also argue that we are too big, because we do a million other things and get
[Amit Varma]: our tentacles into a million other pies, predate upon people in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we are, you know, while we should be a protective state, we are really a parasitic
[Amit Varma]: and predatory state.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, leaving that aside, moving on, you spoke about the definition of...
[Guest]: Before you walk past that line too quickly, I would say, the state is only parasitic towards
[Guest]: those who don't engage it.
[Guest]: But think of that, the state is not parasitic towards those who engage it.
[Guest]: We tend to think that those who engage it are doing it for crony vested purposes.
[Guest]: But, okay, let's take that at face value.
[Guest]: The quality of the road in front of your house is your vested interest.
[Guest]: Let's not pretend that it is not.
[Guest]: What is stopping you from engaging the state for that vested interest?
[Guest]: And I guarantee you, if you engage the state for that vested interest, it would not ignore
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: My...
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's really optimistic.
[Amit Varma]: I would say that just as public choice say to speak of rational ignorance, I can also
[Amit Varma]: speak of rational apathy.
[Amit Varma]: I don't engage with the state about the state of the road outside because I know nothing
[Amit Varma]: is going to come of it.
[Amit Varma]: So why waste my time?
[Amit Varma]: Why not just kind of get on with my life?
[Amit Varma]: And whether I'm wrong or right in this belief, I think most people do kind of believe like
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the parasitic and predatory nature of the state is set up in the design of the
[Amit Varma]: state where it has too much power, where its incentives are aligned in such a way that
[Amit Varma]: it will never give up any of that power, obviously.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it is...
[Guest]: I wouldn't call this ignorance, but I would call this inconsistent with the data.
[Guest]: Let me put it that way.
[Guest]: What I mean by that, what I mean by that is that people who engage with the state would
[Guest]: tell you that their experience has been different.
[Guest]: Nobody would touch the road in front of my street without my knowledge, in front of my
[Guest]: house without my knowledge.
[Guest]: The reason is not power.
[Guest]: The reason is I know them as people.
[Guest]: It's embarrassing for a guy to be doing things in front of your house if he knows you.
[Guest]: Believe me on that.
[Guest]: Once you get the psychology of that thing in your head, it becomes easy to understand
[Guest]: why they're not going to do that.
[Guest]: Problems being what they are, the public choice theory being what it is, he still knows you.
[Guest]: The day you walk up to him and say, you could at least have told me of this thing, and if
[Guest]: it needed coordination with three other departments, I would have helped get that thing done.
[Guest]: Once he can ignore you on that, the second time he won't even ignore you, you actually
[Guest]: know the guy.
[Guest]: You see, it's the same thing.
[Guest]: It's like if something is wrong with my best phone connection, with my electricity connection,
[Guest]: I usually will not call their helpline.
[Guest]: Even though I know there is a helpline, I will call the guy that actually works in my
[Amit Varma]: subdivision.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, number one, I'd say that you're very privileged to be able to do that.
[Amit Varma]: But number two, I'd say that you're speaking at a very local level of engagement.
[Amit Varma]: I'd say at a broader level of engagement, for example, consider that 95% of my taxes
[Amit Varma]: are just predated.
[Amit Varma]: They don't go towards productive things.
[Amit Varma]: They go towards building big statues and towards bailing out inefficient public sector banks
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: They basically count as utterly illegitimate uses of money.
[Amit Varma]: I have no way, even if I engage with the state, I have no, there is no hope in hell that the
[Amit Varma]: level of that predation will come down.
[Amit Varma]: It simply will not.
[Guest]: Well, here's what I know for a fact, that it's much easier, that first, that predation
[Guest]: is a house of cards.
[Guest]: First, it stands on the shoulders of your local elected representative.
[Guest]: And the reason you know that for a fact is that even a prime minister of India, I'm not
[Unknown]: necessarily talking about only this prime minister, but going back for 20 years of various
[Guest]: urban missions in this country, even a prime minister of India cannot make things happen
[Guest]: in your city that your local corporator does not want.
[Guest]: On the contrary, that if he wants to do something, even the prime minister cannot stop it.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to tell you is that this house of cards is not built at the top.
[Guest]: It's built at the bottom, that any change that you believe is going to happen or should
[Guest]: happen is most likely to be made to happen only at the bottom, that the arrangements
[Guest]: of power at the top are far too removed from you to be able to influence them.
[Guest]: You're correct in assessing that, but nonetheless, they are not as far removed from the foundations
[Guest]: within their own parties at the bottom, and the guys at that bottom are not removed from
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: You actually know where he lives.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you know, the structural problem here, and we'll move on from this, because
[Amit Varma]: let's get back to the core issue.
[Amit Varma]: But the structural problem here is again, what public choice theorists would call diffuse
[Amit Varma]: costs and concentrated benefits.
[Amit Varma]: The costs of this predation are diffused among so many people that it is, you know, difficult
[Amit Varma]: to sort of mobilize them to kind of, you know, create a strong enough incentive for your
[Amit Varma]: local corporator to stand up for you and for local corporators everywhere to stand up for
[Amit Varma]: you and for the system to change.
[Amit Varma]: My money is going to be used to bail out inefficient public sector banks and to give bad loans
[Amit Varma]: to cronies who are too close to the powers that be.
[Amit Varma]: No matter what I do, my involvement is not going to change that, Ashwin.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a little bit sort of fatalistic about this.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I mean, how it would change is if government was much more local.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as, you know, local governance matters, I completely buy your point.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, a lot of the things you said, even in our last episode, sort of gave me
[Amit Varma]: tons of insight about that.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to kind of explore that further.
[Amit Varma]: One the definitional question, which you pointed out, what is a city and what is not a city?
[Amit Varma]: What is urban and what is not urban?
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode 108 of the scene and the unseen with Ruben Abraham and Pritika Hingorani.
[Amit Varma]: And we spoke about that in detail and why it's important.
[Amit Varma]: Now in your paper also, you know, you've added a bunch of nuance, which I'd like to quote
[Amit Varma]: from that paper to sort of put it out there for my listeners that you speak about.
[Amit Varma]: One, of course, we all know that we are becoming more and more urban in the future, isn't the
[Amit Varma]: cities and people are voting with their feet.
[Amit Varma]: That's a revealed preference.
[Amit Varma]: Even people who romanticize the villages do it from their city home.
[Amit Varma]: So like, give me a break.
[Amit Varma]: Now you point out three different ways, three different patterns in which India is urbanizing.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote from your paper now, one, the addition of numbers to existing cities, two,
[Amit Varma]: the urbanization of older rural settlements, and three, large urban projects situated in
[Amit Varma]: panchayat areas isolated from their immediate physical and administrative surroundings.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out about how they present different sets of challenges and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But then you say that one, this definitional problem is, you know, we have to get these
[Amit Varma]: definitions right, because as you just elaborated upon minutes ago, it makes a difference to
[Amit Varma]: the kind of governance that you get.
[Amit Varma]: And two, you've also written about why we need a new framework of urban governance.
[Amit Varma]: So lay out the vision for this new framework.
[Guest]: I want to take the opportunity to criticize one more commission before we forget that.
[Guest]: And this is the set of the finance commissions.
[Guest]: The finance commissions are doing a terrible job, there's just no other way to sort of,
[Guest]: they are supposed to assign pools of public money between different stewards of that money
[Guest]: at different levels of government.
[Guest]: The finance commissions have no reason to overlook the migration of people from rural
[Guest]: to urban areas.
[Guest]: So if they wanted to, they could easily make higher allocations for local councils and
[Guest]: for urban related problems, number one, but they don't do that.
[Unknown]: And the finance commissions typically tend to behave like agents of the highest body
[Guest]: of the most highest level of government to whom they're making allocations.
[Guest]: So the National Finance Commission behaves like it's an extension of the government of
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: The State Finance Commission behaves like it's the extension of the state, you know,
[Guest]: state government.
[Guest]: So a couple of years ago, I was in, you know, I was giving a presentation to the State Finance
[Guest]: Commission.
[Guest]: And I was actually telling them that you have more powers than you yourself seem to realize
[Guest]: that if you wanted to, you could actually respond to the reality out there and make
[Guest]: allocations of money commensurate to that reality.
[Guest]: But they seem to believe that they had a greater obligation to the state government than they
[Guest]: did to local government, number one.
[Guest]: The second thing is that state governments, in particular, have been guilty of not setting
[Guest]: up certain layers of administration at all, for example, the metropolitan planning body
[Guest]: that is required to exist in a large area like Bengaluru, Mumbai, Delhi, by and large,
[Guest]: these don't exist, right?
[Guest]: Now, the State Finance Commission need not say, since these things don't exist, I'll
[Guest]: not make any allocation to them.
[Guest]: But that's what they do.
[Guest]: They basically endorse the fact that statutory levels of government do not exist, and say
[Guest]: there's no point in making allocations of money to them because they do not exist.
[Guest]: My argument to that was, if you allocated money to the Metropolitan Planning Committee,
[Guest]: you can be sure that it would exist, because people would follow the money, right?
[Guest]: Basically, what the Finance Commissions are doing today is a disservice to the organization
[Guest]: of the country, and a disservice to the structures of government that are supposed to be in place
[Guest]: to respond to that organization.
[Guest]: So this is the third commission that has utterly failed, and it was the Election Commission.
[Unknown]: The Election Commission has failed in another respect, which is that you can't even be sure
[Guest]: that local bodies will have elections on time, right?
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, the Election Commission has a very high level of preparedness for holding
[Guest]: state and national elections as per a calendar, but has never bothered to speak about the
[Guest]: electoral calendar of local government at all, or even the electoral calendar.
[Guest]: Now, one could argue that the states take the view that this is an administrative matter
[Guest]: within the states, but that doesn't stop the Election Commission, which is quite happy
[Unknown]: talking about simultaneous elections to Luxembourg and other states.
[Guest]: There's no reason why it can't talk about an actual electoral issue, if it wants to.
[Unknown]: But I feel, broadly, these four commissions, the Delimitation Commission, the Municipalization
[Guest]: Commission, the Election Commission, and the Finance Commission, but to varying degrees
[Guest]: and for varying reasons, have collectively combined to let down, they're more like, no,
[Guest]: they're all omissions rather than commissions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Well said.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me about your sort of the governance framework that we really kind of need.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, it seems to me that in some ways, the 74th Amendment was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in the early 90s, was a seminal moment in terms of empowering local governments.
[Amit Varma]: But in another way, it wasn't because nothing really happened.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, much of what was laid out in it was not carried out.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, give me and give our listeners a sort of a sense of how the thinking towards
[Amit Varma]: urban governance has been evolved, evolving and where it has fallen short.
[Guest]: The thing to say even about Panchayati Raj is that the imagination of a new direction
[Guest]: in law is often related to the political individuals whose imagination it is at birth.
[Guest]: So one could argue that Ramakrishna Hegde really cared about Panchayati Raj and that
[Guest]: with his passing from the political stage, a large part of the impetus for Panchayati
[Guest]: Raj died in Karnataka.
[Guest]: One could make that claim.
[Guest]: Alternately, you could say that somehow, some bizarre combination of Mani Iyer and Rajiv
[Guest]: Gandhi produced the 74th Amendment, which was, in my opinion, very poorly drafted, despite
[Guest]: an overall intent that one could find no room for.
[Guest]: And even the people who actually worked on it 20 years later had concluded that what
[Guest]: we have done with the 74th Amendment in particular is that we have overemphasized representation
[Guest]: and under-emphasized leadership, which is why you don't really find people emerging
[Guest]: from the bottom rungs of politics in India and rising to larger rungs, higher rungs through
[Guest]: actual achievement in public office.
[Guest]: There's a lot of parachuting that still happens in higher public offices.
[Guest]: And that's partly because the leadership space at the local level is heavily suppressed.
[Guest]: In our city, we have a situation where the mayor is changed every year.
[Guest]: There's just no practical way in which he or she can ever be a leader, because by the
[Guest]: time they figure out what the job is, they're sort of on their way out.
[Guest]: And there's not a whole lot of leadership that can emerge in this way.
[Guest]: Some other states have direct elections for mayors.
[Guest]: I think, in general, it would be a useful practice to have direct elections for mayors
[Guest]: and city presidents.
[Guest]: But I also think it would be useful for the terms of mayors and city presidents to be
[Unknown]: no more than three or four years.
[Guest]: We have a situation in which your local corporator and the prime minister have the same term
[Guest]: in office.
[Guest]: And you have to ask yourself, is that really a good way to do this?
[Guest]: I don't think we need corporators to have longer than three years in office, or even
[Guest]: two and a half years is probably enough in some way, that you have to have a mechanism
[Guest]: for repeatedly taking the pulse of the people and their preference.
[Guest]: But somehow, we seem to sort of not get that, that we don't actually think that going back
[Guest]: to the people for reaffirmation of their voice and preference is a good thing, that the efficiency
[Guest]: argument often runs contrary to the public will, because we tell ourselves in many, many
[Guest]: circumstances that it's efficient to ignore the public and do the thing that seems to
[Guest]: be right with or without them.
[Guest]: And I think this has permeated the entire system.
[Unknown]: There are lots of officials in particular who will tell you public engagement is a slippery
[Guest]: slope.
[Guest]: And you can see these with these master plans, right?
[Guest]: The master plan is an interesting document in our cities, for two reasons.
[Guest]: Master plans are supposed to be prepared through consultative processes.
[Guest]: And invaluably, they're not.
[Guest]: They're just sort of put up in some random way for a limited period of time.
[Guest]: When BDA put up its master plan the last time, the email address at which they wanted you
[Guest]: to respond with suggestions was itself wrong.
[Guest]: But no such address actually existed.
[Guest]: So they sort of go through the process, almost like a checkbox.
[Guest]: But more than that, the master plans are wrong for another reason, that each master plan
[Guest]: typically contains within it a set of planning districts for which the planning authorities
[Guest]: are supposed to create town planning schemes for the implementation of the plan within
[Guest]: each of those planning districts.
[Guest]: As far as I know, no planning authorities actually carried out that second step.
[Guest]: It's like saying, we're going to have a baby, we're just not going to feed it, right?
[Guest]: And that's ridiculous, that if you're not going to feed the baby, you shouldn't be having
[Guest]: the baby in the first place, right?
[Guest]: It's a harsh comparison, I realize.
[Guest]: But really, that's really what it is.
[Guest]: We go to great lengths to develop a plan that we say is supposed to produce a certain outcome.
[Guest]: But we don't take any of the intermediate steps needed to achieve that outcome.
[Guest]: Not only that, no state government feels obliged to fund any part of the plan in its budget.
[Guest]: Then if you look at the budget of a state, any state, you will not find a section within
[Guest]: it that says, here are the master plans that we have received from the 40 to 60-odd planning
[Guest]: authorities in the state, and here is our statutory commitment to the budgets of each
[Guest]: of those plans.
[Guest]: You will not find that anywhere.
[Guest]: So the planning bodies are making a plan that no one is obliged to fund.
[Guest]: So what is the point of such a plan that you can make it to the cows come home, and you're
[Guest]: not going to get any movement in that direction.
[Guest]: So essentially, you have to break that cycle of one arm or branch of the government saying,
[Guest]: I have nothing to do with the commitments that are made by another arm or branch of
[Amit Varma]: the government.
[Amit Varma]: So make this concrete for me, give me a sense of what a plan would contain, and what would
[Amit Varma]: be the intermediate step which is not carried out, and who would be responsible for these
[Amit Varma]: different stages.
[Amit Varma]: Like you've mentioned in the last episode, we did together eloquently about how government
[Amit Varma]: tends to work in silos, and they don't coordinate with each other, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But make it concrete, what specific thing would a plan contain or has a plan contained
[Amit Varma]: in the past in your knowledge, and what are the intermediate steps that were not done
[Guest]: and why?
[Guest]: So I think a good plan should have three things, it should have a desired outcome, which can
[Guest]: be spatial, economical, land use, it can cover, it should be comprehensive across all sectors,
[Guest]: it should cover water, waste, energy, jobs, all sorts of things, it should be comprehensive,
[Guest]: and it should have end goals in sight for the plan period.
[Guest]: The second thing it should have is a set of intermediate plans for where you expect to
[Guest]: be along this journey of implementing the plan.
[Guest]: I remember a conversation with Vijay Kelkar, almost 20 years ago, I'm going to say, maybe
[Guest]: even more.
[Guest]: At that time, the government had just passed this Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
[Guest]: Act, FRBM, I think it was called, and the idea was that they would balance the budget
[Guest]: or keep the fiscal deficit under a certain number.
[Guest]: And so, I met Dr. Kelkar, I'm going to say, nine months before the election, and he was
[Guest]: saying that within the next three quarters, the government's fiscal targets would come
[Guest]: in alignment to the FRBM Act, and of course, the very first thing that happened when the
[Guest]: next government took power was that they deferred the implementation of the FRBM Act.
[Unknown]: And the thing that I was pointing out is that if you're going to hit a certain target in
[Guest]: 10 months or a year, you ought to be able to get one third of the way in the next three
[Unknown]: months and half the way in the next three months and so on and so forth, so that you're
[Guest]: seeing real progress towards an outcome like that.
[Guest]: The idea that you're going to come to a planned outcome in 15 years without seeing any of
[Guest]: the intermediate steps happen after two years or four years or six years or eight years
[Guest]: is ridiculous.
[Guest]: But when the plan is not implemented for the first two years, the planning authorities
[Guest]: tell themselves, we still have 13 years to implement it, when they're not implemented
[Guest]: for four years, they tell themselves, they have 11 years to implement it, and so on and
[Guest]: so forth.
[Unknown]: And then you come to the 11th year, and you have only four years to implement them, you're
[Guest]: still telling yourself the same thing, and that's how you come to the 15th year.
[Guest]: And if you look at the outcome in the city, and the actual plan that was made 15 or 20
[Guest]: years ago, they have no correlation to each other.
[Guest]: And so what you need is a set of intermediate plans for what you might even call them annual
[Guest]: plans that pursuant to a large master plan, here is what needs to happen in each of these
[Guest]: years in two directions, one, that you break down the plan into implementable parts along
[Guest]: the way.
[Guest]: And second, that when the state government quote, unquote, approved the plan, that approval
[Guest]: becomes an obligation on the part of the state government to fund each of these annual plans.
[Guest]: Otherwise, the approval has no meaning, the state government says I like the plan, and
[Guest]: therefore it is approved.
[Unknown]: But when budget time comes around, they don't feel obliged to fund any part of it.
[Guest]: So the approval of a plan must be accompanied by a statutory obligation on the state government
[Guest]: to fund that.
[Guest]: If you don't do these two things together that have intermediate steps for implementation,
[Guest]: and assured funding for implementation, you're not going to get the outcome that you're imagining
[Guest]: in the plan.
[Guest]: But the entire exercise of planning, I was chief guest at the 50th anniversary, I'm going
[Guest]: to say anniversary celebrations of the Department of Town and Country Planning, I think DTC
[Guest]: is, either I alone or I with somebody else was chief guest at that event.
[Guest]: And I pointed out to them that in 50 years, the department had not carried out a single
[Guest]: town planning scheme anywhere in the state.
[Guest]: And I actually challenged them to say in this year, together, some of you, one of you, subsets
[Guest]: of you come up with just one town planning scheme, anywhere in the state, and I will
[Guest]: work with you to get it implemented.
[Guest]: But nobody in the town and country planning department wants to do that.
[Guest]: They're quite happy, color coding the outcome, without getting into the details of how that
[Guest]: outcome is going to be achieved.
[Guest]: It's like saying, I'm going to send my child to school, they're going to graduate from
[Guest]: high school in 12 years.
[Guest]: But you know what, the school doesn't teach physics or mathematics or geography or history
[Unknown]: or any of those kinds of things.
[Amit Varma]: And you still keep telling yourself, my child is going to graduate in 12 years, in a school
[Unknown]: that doesn't teach any of the subjects on which he's going to be tested in 12 years.
[Guest]: That's really what's happened to our plans.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of this is because these people in question aren't really accountable.
[Amit Varma]: So 12 years later, there are a completely different set of people in charge in the bureaucracy.
[Amit Varma]: And the politicians have moved on.
[Amit Varma]: And anyway, they are focused only on the short term imperatives of the next elections.
[Amit Varma]: So how much of that is because of the way the system is designed itself, like before
[Amit Varma]: we kind of talk about before we lament the different ways in which the system doesn't
[Amit Varma]: work, how much of this can just be sorted by the domino effects of fixing the design
[Amit Varma]: of the system itself.
[Amit Varma]: And if it would be sorted by that, what would those fixes be?
[Guest]: I think this is a good question, because there is a certain what you might call budgetary
[Guest]: distance between the voter and the decision maker.
[Guest]: And there is one thing we can do to bridge budgetary distance.
[Guest]: I think the ward committees should be funded directly.
[Guest]: Just like municipalities have their funding, we should have a mechanism for funding the
[Guest]: ward committees directly.
[Guest]: So that people in each area become familiar and comfortable with the idea of making decisions
[Guest]: about public funds.
[Guest]: Today, the everyday experience of the voter, or the every month experience of the voter,
[Guest]: is completely disconnected from any decisions about what to do with public funds.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it becomes difficult for you to understand what's happening with public
[Guest]: money at higher levels, including the fact that they're laying out Punjab, not Punjab,
[Guest]: some bank or the other.
[Guest]: I forgot the name, some Maharashtra something bank, I remember that, right, with your taxpayer
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think it's useful to have the practice of engagement with public funds and
[Guest]: funding the local committees at the citizen level could be a good experiment to get that
[Guest]: going.
[Guest]: I even proposed this in Delhi government some time ago, that saying, why are we funding
[Guest]: only, you know, the MCDs with the different councils of Delhi, North, South, East and
[Unknown]: New Delhi Municipal Corporation, you could actually directly fund the ward committees
[Guest]: of each of those councils, and let people in their respective areas also have voice
[Guest]: in what projects are done in those areas, it may not be even a lot of money.
[Guest]: But I think it is important to directly fund the ward committees.
[Guest]: And if you did that, people would get more comfortable with this.
[Guest]: And to some extent, the school management committees have a voice now in payments to
[Guest]: teachers and things like that.
[Guest]: So what you have to do is that you have to create a system for public administration
[Guest]: in which there is increasing voter and citizen participation in the management of public
[Guest]: funds.
[Guest]: So if you see that presentation that I sent you, which I'll send you a PDF of it later,
[Guest]: I call it the publicly managed city, right, it's the city, we have to think of the city
[Guest]: as a space that is actually managed by the citizens too, not merely lived in by citizens.
[Guest]: Citizens are not merely consumers of governance.
[Guest]: The fundamental notion of a republic is deeply tied to the idea that citizens are also creators
[Guest]: of governance.
[Guest]: But this idea that I, Amit Verma, Ashwin Mahesh, is happy being only a consumer, and imagine
[Guest]: that if you and I were the only two citizens in the country, and I was happy thinking that
[Guest]: you would create all the outcomes I cared about, and you were happy thinking that I
[Guest]: would create all the outcomes you cared about, there wouldn't be anybody to create those
[Guest]: outcomes.
[Unknown]: This is really what's happening at a large scale.
[Guest]: Everyone tells themselves they're only a consumer of the outcomes that they want.
[Guest]: There are not enough people actually going out and creating the outcomes.
[Guest]: Or in fact, there are people going out and creating outcomes contrary to what you and
[Guest]: I want.
[Guest]: And some of it is quite brutal.
[Guest]: I don't know if I sort of mentioned this in our earlier conversation, there was an interesting
[Guest]: case about 10 years ago here, in which the court had ruled that people in a certain neighborhood
[Guest]: needed to be given what they call a kata.
[Guest]: In Bangalore, there are two kinds of katas, there are katas for actual legitimate buildings
[Guest]: and katas for not-so-legitimate buildings.
[Guest]: And these are called A-kata and B-kata, A being more legitimate.
[Guest]: And so one set of people had gone and fought for their B-katas to be converted into A-katas.
[Guest]: And the high court, after some prolonged hearing, had actually ruled in their favor.
[Guest]: And so they went to the municipal corporation in their local neighborhood and said, well,
[Guest]: let this thing change from B to A now.
[Guest]: And there was a lot of stalling in that.
[Guest]: And then there was a big protest outside the zonal office of the municipality, and it became
[Unknown]: sort of a big thing.
[Guest]: And at one point, and at that time I was in government, I was the Deputy Urban Advisor
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: And somebody called me up and said, you know, can you sort of help?
[Guest]: And I said, well, I educated myself a little bit about it.
[Guest]: And then a little while later, the zonal commissioner called me and said, can you come here?
[Guest]: I said, why do I need to come here?
[Guest]: You've got orders from a court telling you what to do.
[Guest]: What's the difficulty with doing it?
[Guest]: So he said, if you come here, I'll tell you.
[Guest]: So I went over there.
[Guest]: I was kind of curious too at this point.
[Guest]: So I went over there and he said, Ashwin sir, this is the problem.
[Guest]: This file on which I need to make the necessary annotation, it has been taken away by the
[Guest]: bad guys physically from my office.
[Guest]: So it's all very well for a court to say this should be done, but that doesn't contend with
[Guest]: the reality that I'm not in physical possession of the file.
[Guest]: What do you expect me to do now?
[Guest]: So yes, even problems like that can be solved.
[Guest]: I'm not going to get into how that got solved.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to tell you is that we imagine a techno managerial solution to problems
[Guest]: that are fundamentally social and political.
[Guest]: That sometimes the answer to the problem is not in how, it is in who.
[Guest]: And the who has legitimacy by behaving like a compelling citizen, by behaving like a citizen
[Guest]: who's comfortable with and engaged in politics.
[Guest]: Then you can solve some of these problems.
[Guest]: And that's why I told you earlier that when you say my one vote has little voice, if you
[Guest]: wrote that letter to 200 people, you'd feel very differently about your voice and so would
[Guest]: all your elected representatives.
[Guest]: So I actually think that there are very many things that we can actually do to magnify
[Guest]: our voice.
[Guest]: And the fact that so many other people are quiet, in fact, would magnify your voice even
[Guest]: more powerfully because you would have the advantage of their silence too.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, you know, Roger Daltrey and Entwistle and all of the members of the who would be
[Amit Varma]: very excited because you just said the answer lies in the who.
[Amit Varma]: But sort of jokes apart, you know, before we move on, what happened in that case?
[Amit Varma]: How did you solve out that A khata B khata problem?
[Guest]: You have to bend some people.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: I won't, I won't get into the details of how you do that, but clearly concerned citizens
[Amit Varma]: can achieve a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Let me, let me sort of your document was fascinating and obviously your document, your presentation,
[Amit Varma]: all those links will be there in the show notes for the readers to read.
[Amit Varma]: But let me kind of try and simplify it for myself to understand what you're getting at
[Amit Varma]: in terms of a new kind of governance.
[Amit Varma]: And you can tell me if my sort of summation of it is broadly correct.
[Amit Varma]: And you've proposed a number of reforms that need to be made, which we can discuss in detail
[Amit Varma]: after this.
[Amit Varma]: But the gist of what they do effectively is essentially changing the design of the system
[Amit Varma]: and the incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And there are a number of ways you point out in which that can be done.
[Amit Varma]: Number one is that like you earlier pointed out, a very small percentage of our taxes
[Amit Varma]: actually go towards local administration.
[Amit Varma]: So especially those taxes which are generated locally should go to the local administration.
[Amit Varma]: So there is that link and therefore, you know, that builds that much more accountability
[Amit Varma]: and that changes the incentives for them to actually perform to, you change the structure
[Amit Varma]: of local governance.
[Amit Varma]: So a, they are more empowered, of course, which is a whole new ballgame.
[Amit Varma]: But also you try to create a empowered mayors, like, you know, back in the day in, in British
[Amit Varma]: times, you know, Rajendra Prasad was a mayor of Patna at one point, people like Raj Gopalachari,
[Amit Varma]: Nehru himself, Sardar Patel in Ahmedabad all played great roles, either as mayors or as
[Amit Varma]: important people in the municipal councils.
[Amit Varma]: And to bring that back, we need empowered mayors and yeah, and Subhash Chandra Bose,
[Amit Varma]: of course, who was mayor of Kolkata, and Chitranjan Das, I think just before him, and we need
[Amit Varma]: to sort of bring that back.
[Amit Varma]: And there are various ways of designing that in terms of the power you give to them in
[Amit Varma]: terms that you have, they should not be so short, so they have no time to make a difference,
[Amit Varma]: but they should not be so long that you're not getting that constant feedback from the
[Amit Varma]: public, which a healthy system needs.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, thirdly, you've spoken about the need for how whichever is a body in charge
[Amit Varma]: of planning, in a way is breaking past the problem of different governments performing
[Amit Varma]: in silos, because it is making these overarching plans and going down into detail.
[Amit Varma]: And the fourth point that you point out, which is, you know, an important nuance is that
[Amit Varma]: the departments in charge of planning and implementation have to be separate.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, you have sort of bad incentives, and that can lead to bad outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: So these were sort of the interesting key structural reforms that struck me while I
[Amit Varma]: was reading your paper.
[Amit Varma]: One, is this broadly correct?
[Amit Varma]: Two, have I missed out something important that you'd like to elaborate upon?
[Guest]: No, I think these are broadly correct.
[Guest]: And I sort of pick on some of these things in particular, because they have the potential
[Guest]: for domino effects.
[Guest]: The minute you say that planning and implementation have to be separated, some of the greater
[Guest]: executive authority for implementation will move away from the planning body and close
[Guest]: up to the municipalities.
[Guest]: The minute you say that locally attributable taxes should accrue to the local municipality,
[Guest]: it makes the executive office holders and the local councillors that much more powerful.
[Unknown]: Because now I remember a conversation in Davangere, a few years ago with the mayor over there,
[Unknown]: he said, why should I bother with economic development in my area?
[Guest]: I'm not going to get any additional taxes to the council as a result of it.
[Guest]: So I go and attract a major company to set up over here, create jobs and all of that
[Unknown]: stuff.
[Guest]: And virtually all of the taxes that that company and its people would pay go elsewhere.
[Guest]: Whereas if you were to say that there are two or three locally attributable taxes, which
[Guest]: are quite easy, for example, fuel taxes, right?
[Guest]: You could easily give a portion of the fuel taxes to the municipalities in which the fuel
[Guest]: stations are located.
[Guest]: You could easily give a professional tax to the municipalities where the professionals
[Guest]: are working.
[Guest]: So there are a set of taxes that you can easily identify as originating from the local economy
[Guest]: and for which the local council should have the right to a share.
[Guest]: If you did that, every city would start to think that it could compete for more public
[Guest]: money and begin to imagine its development as decided by monies that are within its control.
[Guest]: Today most municipal bodies and panchayats are saying they're basically trying to figure
[Guest]: out how much the state and the center are going to give them.
[Guest]: And then they make a plan for what they're going to get as largest almost from these
[Unknown]: things.
[Guest]: And these things are not done fairly, as I said, by the finance commissions.
[Guest]: So I actually think it's much better to create a system where our taxes can go more directly
[Guest]: to the local councils.
[Guest]: And frankly, even between the state and the center, I find this current practice of collection
[Guest]: by the center and subsequent distribution to the states very problematic.
[Guest]: We're seeing what's happening with GST.
[Guest]: You have two contenders for a pool of money in which effectively there is the asymmetry
[Guest]: of possession.
[Guest]: The center has possession of the money and therefore can afford delay in deciding the
[Guest]: transfer of that money to the states.
[Guest]: But I actually think that one could easily imagine a reverse system in which the states
[Guest]: keep their portion and pass on the rest of the portion to the center.
[Guest]: And if you were to set it up that way, perhaps the states would be in a stronger position.
[Guest]: I'm just saying that too many of these collaborative systems between levels of government have
[Guest]: become captured in the asymmetric power of one level of government.
[Unknown]: And this is actually reinforced in the political parties where there is a notion that the MLA
[Guest]: is more important than the corporator and the MP is more important than the MLA and
[Guest]: so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And the hierarchy of parties now reinforces the hierarchies that emanate from governance
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: And which is unfortunate, but also predictable.
[Guest]: The hierarchy in the party is in fact derived from the powers that party people get when
[Guest]: they are in government.
[Guest]: And if government has a hierarchy, it's natural that the party will derive that hierarchy
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: So I think we need to get to a situation where we nearly see different levels of government
[Guest]: as each being equally important to the totality of governance, but not that one level of government
[Guest]: is inferior or superior to another level of government.
[Guest]: They play a distinct and different role, but they're all equally important.
[Guest]: You don't expect your local corporator to organize an army.
[Guest]: He just can't do that.
[Guest]: That's not his, anywhere near his job.
[Guest]: There's a central government for that.
[Guest]: But you can't expect the central government to have anything to do with cleaning up the
[Guest]: streets in your neighborhood either, but which it seems quite willing to do, and not just
[Guest]: this government.
[Unknown]: I mean, I remember when JNU-RM started, and I think we should go back to the history of
[Guest]: central intervention in urban governance.
[Guest]: When the Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission was started up, and this was, I'm going to
[Guest]: say, in UPA, in the first term of the UPA, it was, at that time, Dr. Singh, who was prime
[Guest]: minister, had even committed himself to his prime ministership being judged on administrative
[Guest]: performance.
[Guest]: And this was thought to be one of the first steps taken in that direction.
[Guest]: It was a complete disaster, because the way it actually played out, it was a very nice,
[Guest]: but very predictable game.
[Guest]: So the center would pass a set of rules and laws saying these things should be done by
[Guest]: the municipalities.
[Guest]: And if the municipalities do those things, we'll give them some money.
[Guest]: The municipalities will write a letter to the center saying, yes, we promise to do those
[Unknown]: things, now give the first tranche of the money, and then the center will give the first
[Unknown]: tranche of the money.
[Guest]: And six months later, the center will write to the municipalities to say, what about those
[Guest]: things you promised to do?
[Guest]: Have you done that?
[Unknown]: The municipalities will write back saying, well, you know, it's taking us a little time
[Guest]: to get this started, but don't worry, we're on it, but meanwhile, can you give us the
[Unknown]: second tranche of money?
[Guest]: And the center would say, well, we're not very happy about this whole situation, but
[Guest]: here's the second tranche anyway.
[Guest]: And then this sort of would go on to the point where 90% of the money would be transferred
[Guest]: without any of the actual promises being made.
[Guest]: And everybody on both sides of this letter writing knew perfectly well what was happening.
[Guest]: It's not that they somehow stumbled into the well in the dark, but they were quite clear
[Guest]: that this is where it was going to go, but it was quite willfully done in that way.
[Guest]: What it gives you is plausible deniability, but in fact, it was willful blindness more
[Guest]: than plausible deniability, that nobody wanted the political system to change in favor of
[Guest]: stronger local governments.
[Guest]: And so they were trying to merely create flows of money intended to achieve administratively
[Guest]: better outcomes without being committed to processes by which citizens could participate
[Guest]: in improving those outcomes themselves.
[Guest]: Whereas the first thing, if you really cared about urban development, you would simply
[Guest]: say, I'm going to set up a delimitation commission that is permanent and is going to delimit
[Guest]: all urban constituencies every 10 years and will make sure that all elections to all councils
[Guest]: are held without a break.
[Guest]: If you did this, you would get a rhythm to urban governance, which now actually exists
[Guest]: in Panchayati Raj, more in the villages, far more than in the urban areas.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think that the devil is in the details, unfortunately, but that's always
[Guest]: going to be true.
[Guest]: What we need is a way of responding to that reality by getting citizens to become familiar
[Unknown]: and comfortable with the details.
[Guest]: The idea that because these are details, it's difficult for citizens to engage them is self
[Guest]: defeating.
[Guest]: So you have to really ask and answer the question, how do I get ordinary people to be comfortable
[Guest]: with the details?
[Guest]: And things like funding ward committees are one way of getting people comfortable with
[Guest]: the details.
[Guest]: In South Africa, they tried another program, it's called a Neighborhood Improvement Partnership
[Guest]: of some kind, a city improvement district, we would call it, then you could actually
[Guest]: pay more taxes than you were required to pay.
[Unknown]: I mean, this is a nice story.
[Guest]: Imagine that you have to pay a hundred grand in taxes.
[Guest]: You were allowed to pay a hundred and ten.
[Guest]: Think of that.
[Guest]: People would say, well, my taxes are a hundred grand, but I can pay a hundred and five or
[Guest]: a hundred and ten.
[Guest]: And people would say, well, nobody would do that.
[Guest]: But there was an incentive to pay a hundred and five.
[Guest]: The incentive was that if you paid a hundred and five or a hundred and ten, twenty-five
[Guest]: would be given back to you to spend as you like in your area.
[Guest]: Now think about that, but if enough people voted in favor of such a scheme, and there
[Guest]: was a threshold, 60% of the people living in a locality had to sign up for this, and
[Guest]: once they signed up, they would be obliged to pay a hundred and five, not just, it wouldn't
[Guest]: be voluntary anymore.
[Guest]: So, and it would be binding on the other 40% who didn't sign up too.
[Guest]: So it was quite a powerfully done thing.
[Guest]: And that's the other thing, that council resolutions in India don't have the weight of law.
[Guest]: Only state and central governments make law.
[Guest]: Councils don't make law.
[Guest]: Whereas in many other parts of the world, councils can make laws within the local realm.
[Guest]: We need to change that as well.
[Guest]: But in any case, so they have this scheme, and so people started paying more taxes so
[Guest]: that they could get control back of some of those taxes for implementing projects in their
[Guest]: own areas.
[Guest]: And initially, it was only the well-off neighborhoods that did that.
[Guest]: But eventually, it did get to a point where even the poorer neighborhoods began to believe
[Guest]: that by contributing a little bit more to the tax kitty, they would actually get outcomes
[Guest]: for themselves that were better than what was being delivered by the government of the
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: So they began to participate in some schemes too.
[Guest]: And these are quite common in Canada.
[Guest]: They're common in New Zealand.
[Guest]: They're common in a few places where city improvement districts have been thought through
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: So there are ways of building citizen participation linked to public funds that get lots of people
[Guest]: comfortable with how money is used locally.
[Guest]: If you think about it, if you live in a community, like I do, I live in a community of about,
[Guest]: I'm going to say, 5,000 adults, like 2,000 families, 4,000 to 5,000 adults live in this
[Guest]: community.
[Guest]: It is still a community that is probably run by 25 people.
[Guest]: And you might say 25 out of 5,000 is a really small number.
[Guest]: But these 25 people have a reasonable experience of managing money on behalf of a much larger
[Guest]: group of people, and therefore are probably even well-placed to understand the use of
[Guest]: public funds in the local area in some way.
[Guest]: And these are 25 people whose experience would not have existed previously when the communities
[Guest]: were not organized like this.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think we have to accept that details are an important part of the answer.
[Guest]: Not everybody will be able to or willing to engage with the details, but the few who do
[Guest]: or the some who do are performing a vital function in keeping alive a connection between
[Guest]: the represented and the representative, and that connection has a multiplier effect because
[Guest]: one of those 25 lives above me, I know I can go talk to him, even without being one of
[Guest]: the 25.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think this is why representative systems for money are probably more important
[Guest]: than representative systems by themselves, that fundamentally people begin to understand
[Guest]: the potential and the power of pooled funds by participating in these kinds of allocations.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no reason why we can't do that.
[Amit Varma]: It's not like the guys who are currently allocating money are geniuses.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm very taken in by your example of how the incentives of citizens also change when
[Amit Varma]: they know that their money is going directly to a local body.
[Amit Varma]: And if they feel that they have some control over where that is going, they might begin
[Amit Varma]: to care more.
[Amit Varma]: Though I'm a little kind of skeptical of the example you pointed out that, oh, if you pay
[Amit Varma]: 105 instead of 100, we will give 25 back to you.
[Amit Varma]: Because in any case, they should give 25 back to, you know, in any case, your tax money
[Amit Varma]: should be used efficiently.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you have to give a further incentive to the thieving state to, you know, give you
[Amit Varma]: the services that you need?
[Guest]: But sort of.
[Guest]: Yeah, I thought about that.
[Guest]: I thought about that.
[Guest]: I actually think that in India, it would not be such a bad thing, because I think local
[Guest]: taxation is very low, is very low.
[Guest]: The property taxes that we pay in Mumbai, I think it's reasonably high.
[Guest]: But elsewhere, the property taxes are pitifully low that we don't even pay in this city.
[Guest]: I'm going to say, if you owned a house that was worth a crore of rupees or a building
[Guest]: that was worth a crore of rupees, I don't think you would pay more than 7 or 8,000 rupees
[Guest]: on average across different neighborhoods as the property tax per year on that building.
[Guest]: If you did this in a developed country, an equivalently priced property would attract
[Guest]: at least 10 to 20 times the taxation that it attracts here.
[Guest]: So you would end up paying at least a lakh in taxes if the same property was in London.
[Guest]: But one could argue that that's why London has a far higher level of public services
[Guest]: as a result of it.
[Guest]: But the broader point is that there's a trap in this as well.
[Guest]: Politicians do not want to propose higher taxes on the public whose vote they are seeking.
[Guest]: And this is an important thing.
[Guest]: I think certain taxes must have regular and routine upticks.
[Guest]: You can't have a property tax base that is so low and be trapped in a system where political
[Guest]: leaders or political representatives are unwilling to change it for fear that they will not get
[Unknown]: elected.
[Guest]: In fact, now that there is no elected council, there's a proposal to increase the property
[Guest]: taxes because nobody would take the heat for proposing such an increase.
[Guest]: And administrators can be blamed for increasing taxes rather than political people having
[Guest]: to take that heat.
[Guest]: But I actually think that in the process, we have let ourselves down with public funds
[Amit Varma]: quite a bit.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think, you know, the broad thing here is that we can talk about the desirability
[Amit Varma]: of these systems in an ideal world where you actually have responsive government which
[Amit Varma]: uses these taxes well.
[Amit Varma]: In the world that we live in, of course, every Indian will resist higher taxes because 99%
[Amit Varma]: of the taxes are wasted anyway in a myriad different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And we know that, you know, every Indian instinctively understands that it's a predatory state and
[Amit Varma]: politics is basically a game of competing mafias fighting to have the monopoly on violence
[Amit Varma]: that the state gives them.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, moving on, the other broad question also, sort of one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that struck me when you were speaking is about how the sort of hierarchy of importance within
[Amit Varma]: the government from the center to the state to the local is mirrored within the parties.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, my instinctive thought, of course, was that, okay, it's like that
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: It's not like that elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: You'll have primaries in the US and all of that and it's a little more bottom up.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess the way the party is organized would be driven by the way the spoils of power
[Amit Varma]: are organized and how governance is organized.
[Amit Varma]: Now we know that there is this centralizing impulse within the Indian polity and within
[Amit Varma]: the Indian state, there is an impulse to consolidate its power in every way possible.
[Amit Varma]: Now all of these reforms that we're talking about, that more local funds should go to
[Amit Varma]: the local body, more, you know, the mayor should be more empowered and should have,
[Amit Varma]: you know, falana dhimkana terms and all of that, all of that is dependent on certain
[Amit Varma]: people who are in power giving up some of that power and working against their incentives
[Amit Varma]: as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So two part question, one is how likely are any of these fundamental changes to happen?
[Amit Varma]: And the second part is that it seems that even in the absence of these fundamental changes,
[Amit Varma]: concerned citizens like yourself and what you're doing in Bengaluru can actually go
[Amit Varma]: out there and still make a difference by working hard with local government where, like you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, there are many people who want good outcomes, but don't know how to get it
[Amit Varma]: and don't have the support from civil society.
[Amit Varma]: But that second level where you can't make the fundamental changes, but you still get
[Amit Varma]: involved and do things at a local level seems almost a jogar solution of sorts, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because the state isn't working, let's create this additional layer of citizens who will
[Amit Varma]: enable the state to do things that the state should have been able to do on its own in
[Amit Varma]: the first place, but is not because it is dysfunctional.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your response to sort of these two?
[Guest]: I don't accept that.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you why, that even if I were to be living in a much better functioning
[Guest]: city, I would still look to do things more than the government is already doing.
[Guest]: So it might lead to outcomes that are even better, but I wouldn't necessarily withdraw
[Guest]: from engaging with government simply because I lived in a much better run city.
[Guest]: I've lived in some reasonably well run cities, places like Seattle, for example, and I always
[Guest]: felt inclined to work with public issues, even in places like that.
[Unknown]: But coming to your first question, there is an opportunity that is emerging because the
[Guest]: political class's preference for punting is now catching up to them.
[Guest]: So you have to look at the history of what they did in response to urban migration and
[Guest]: in response also to non-uniform population growth in states.
[Guest]: So you have to remember that the Southern states stabilized their population at least
[Guest]: two to three decades earlier than the Northern states.
[Guest]: And there was a perception in the 70s in particular that states that were performing well in stabilizing
[Guest]: their populations were in fact losing seats in parliament if those seats were distributed
[Guest]: on the basis of population alone.
[Guest]: So in the 42nd Amendment, I believe, it was frozen that representation of each state in
[Guest]: parliament is, even today, frozen on the basis of the 1971 census.
[Guest]: And the fact that population growth in UP and Bihar has been massively different from
[Guest]: population growth in Kerala or Tamil Nadu does not count for anything, but the states
[Guest]: have virtually the same number of seats they have in parliament as they did at that time,
[Guest]: number one.
[Guest]: And there is something to be argued against that.
[Guest]: I understand that it sort of seems to defy the principle of one person, one vote.
[Guest]: But in a federal republic, sometimes these compromises are necessary, and it was certainly
[Guest]: seen as part of a political compromise.
[Guest]: There's no doubt about that.
[Guest]: And then came, during NDA 1, the realization that, so when the 42nd Amendment was passed
[Guest]: in the 70s, it was agreed that for 30 years, representation in parliament would be on the
[Guest]: basis of the 1971 census.
[Guest]: And when we got to the 2001 census, the moment of reckoning had arrived.
[Guest]: And so you had to sort of say, it might have been somebody else's punt in the past, but
[Guest]: it is today's punt.
[Guest]: And when that moment of reckoning arrived, a bunch of people, including Karunanidhi,
[Guest]: Chandra Bavanayadu, various constituent supporters of NDA in particular, were extremely wary
[Guest]: of sort of saying, well, let's now redo the number of seats on the basis of one person,
[Guest]: one vote, because that would have meant that the southern states in particular would lose
[Guest]: representation in parliament to some degree, if you redid the numbers.
[Guest]: And so they came up with one more political compromise, and that was to say, for 25 more
[Guest]: years, we will continue to use the 1971 census.
[Guest]: But they did make one concession, which is to say that within states, we will redraw
[Guest]: the boundaries of constituencies to reflect higher levels of migration from rural to urban
[Guest]: areas.
[Guest]: And this is why during the arts, you had this re-delimitation exercise, which one part of
[Guest]: the country you lived in went through a delimitation of both parliamentary and state constituencies,
[Guest]: but nonetheless keeping the overall numbers of those constituencies within a state the
[Guest]: same as before.
[Guest]: So, you know, Karnataka continues to have 220-odd seats in the legislature and 28 seats
[Guest]: in parliament, but those 228-odd seats of 24, 25, whatever that number is, are not the
[Guest]: same boundaries as they were previously, and the 28 parliamentary constituencies are also
[Guest]: not the same boundaries as they were previously.
[Guest]: So what you have is a situation in which the migratory patterns were accommodated in delimitation.
[Guest]: But even that is not based on the 2001 census, that migration is accelerating and continuing,
[Guest]: but you don't have further delimitation, and this is why I argued for delimitation again.
[Guest]: Once you accepted the principle that inside a state, delimitation is permissible, there's
[Guest]: no reason not to do it after every census, but the way it's set up is, oh, we'll look
[Guest]: at it again in 2026.
[Guest]: That doesn't make any sense.
[Guest]: If it was worth looking at in 2003, it was surely worth looking at in 2012, and in 2022,
[Guest]: without waiting for 2026.
[Guest]: I actually believe that internal delimitation within the state should continue to happen
[Guest]: after every census.
[Guest]: If you did that, the constituencies will be more accurately reflective of trends in migration.
[Guest]: So now we're coming to 2026, it's only five, six years away, so you're going to come to
[Guest]: a second moment of reckoning, and here and there, those who talk about federalism will
[Guest]: already be referring to that.
[Guest]: You may have seen that as well, that essentially people are concerned that even this time,
[Guest]: there cannot be any loss of representation in the national government compared to what
[Guest]: they already have.
[Guest]: And I actually think that if the federal argument were to pick up, one could imagine very many
[Guest]: different ways of imagining the national government too, because in larger structures, it's not
[Guest]: necessarily true that you have to sort of construct them in only one way.
[Unknown]: If you look at the European Union, for example, the European Union has a rotating presidency.
[Guest]: It doesn't seem to have done very much harm to the notion of a union.
[Guest]: So one could argue that we are in some ways able to see and learn from other people's
[Guest]: experiences.
[Guest]: Many countries now have primary elections.
[Guest]: Many countries have non-party primaries as well.
[Guest]: So in a way, the unfortunate part in India is that because of the English language, we
[Guest]: are more familiar with systems of government in the UK and the US.
[Guest]: But among the developed countries of the world, these are the two worst examples that you
[Guest]: could be following.
[Guest]: That in fact, representative democracy is far deeper in the European Union, far deeper
[Guest]: even in a Korea or a New Zealand or Australia than in the UK or in the US.
[Guest]: The US, in fact, has a system of government in which the loser of the popular vote has
[Guest]: a consistently high expectation of becoming the president anyway.
[Guest]: It's a bizarre system that you can lose the popular vote by 3 million people and still
[Guest]: become the president.
[Guest]: The Republican Party has won the popular vote only once in the last 20 years, but they still
[Unknown]: see themselves as an equal contender with the Democrats for the office of the president.
[Guest]: So the sad part is that the US and the UK are really poor examples.
[Guest]: But because virtually all the news that we get in India from abroad tends to be from
[Guest]: these two countries, we don't imagine systems of government that are very different.
[Guest]: The South Africans, for example, they had their first election only in the 90s, right?
[Unknown]: But from the very outset, they have proportionate representation.
[Guest]: Proportionate representation has made each vote count a lot more than the first-past-the-post
[Guest]: system that we have.
[Guest]: But the first-past-the-post system is what the UK and the US use, which very few other
[Guest]: significant democracies use.
[Guest]: Even in the UK, members of the European Parliament were not elected on a first-past-the-post
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: They were elected on proportionate basis.
[Guest]: So broadly, there are other systems of representative government that are proven to be better.
[Guest]: So there's no reason why we can't be learning from those systems instead.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, in an episode, I think episode 149 that I did with JP Narayan, he made, you
[Amit Varma]: know, many of the same points about proportional representation and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And you seem to be talking of, you know, 2026 and, you know, as a sort of a potentially
[Amit Varma]: pivotal moment in this.
[Amit Varma]: But do you see, you know, a different direction emerging in the way that we, you know, practice
[Amit Varma]: our democracy, whether it's the changing of the voting system or whether it's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in the level of federalism or whatever?
[Amit Varma]: Do you, one, see a fundamental shift happening somewhere, and two, if there is, what do you
[Amit Varma]: think will be the political impetus for that shift happening?
[Guest]: So, the political, I mean, the proximate political impetus for whatever might happen in 2026
[Guest]: is that if you do not do something, you will revert to the pre-1971 situation, therefore,
[Guest]: you must do something.
[Unknown]: So you don't have the luxury of not doing anything.
[Guest]: So, the 42nd Amendment and the 84th or 87th, whichever amendment extended it to another
[Guest]: 25 years, have sunset clauses.
[Guest]: So the sunsetting of those amendments would put you in a pre-1971 situation, which would
[Guest]: require delimitation on the basis of the most recent census and apportionment of seats on
[Guest]: that basis, which I'm certain would be highly unacceptable to parties across low population
[Guest]: growth states.
[Guest]: And today, the difference between the low population growth states and the high population
[Guest]: growth states is quite stark, even more so than it was in the 70s or the 90s.
[Guest]: Today, if you read the vote on the basis of population within states, it's quite likely
[Guest]: that Karnataka will lose three or four seats, Tamil Nadu will lose five or six seats, Kerala
[Guest]: will lose two or three seats.
[Guest]: You would get an across-the-board loss of 15 seats in the national parliament in South
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: You might get similar losses of seats in the Northeast.
[Guest]: You would essentially get, broadly, a government of North India, with a few others in support
[Guest]: in election after election.
[Guest]: So I think the same impetus that made people stand up in the 70s and the late 90s against
[Guest]: the one person, one vote, continue to exist in regional politics even today.
[Guest]: So I expect some sort of compromise from that to emerge, even if we have a dominant political
[Guest]: party on one side of the spectrum.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, the important thing is for us, both as a people and in a political
[Guest]: class, to be able to navigate these kinds of questions responsibly, because they have
[Guest]: the potential to become flashpoints as well.
[Guest]: And therefore, responsible stewardship of these things is important.
[Guest]: And I really, you know, I think NDA1 did a really good job of stewarding this with the
[Guest]: compromise that was made on internal delimitation.
[Guest]: I just wish it had gone further and made internal delimitation a decadal exercise rather than
[Guest]: a one-time exercise.
[Guest]: I think there are still enough people with maturity and, you know, genuine regard for
[Guest]: the Indian Union to take this transition also in stride.
[Guest]: But it requires a lot more people being supporters of such responsible stewardship as well.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we've almost, we've hit the three-hour mark.
[Amit Varma]: And here's an interesting question to sort of wind down towards the end of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: which is, does good governance require good citizens?
[Amit Varma]: Because at some level, what you seem to be saying is, and this seems almost directed
[Amit Varma]: at me personally, that Amit, you are too apathetic.
[Amit Varma]: You can make change.
[Amit Varma]: Don't give up hope.
[Amit Varma]: You have to get your butt out there and try to get change done and stop complaining about
[Amit Varma]: the predatory state and then good things will happen.
[Amit Varma]: The state will not only become less predatory, it will do the things that it is supposed
[Amit Varma]: to do for you.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I am a little skeptical about this because I think that the design of the state should
[Amit Varma]: create such incentives which guarantee good governance without every citizen needing to
[Amit Varma]: be a good citizen.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in much the same way that one often says that you should design a state in such
[Amit Varma]: a way with such checks and balances that even if a very bad person comes to power as a head
[Amit Varma]: of the state, he can't do much damage because, you know, there are enough safeguards and
[Amit Varma]: all built in.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, I would say that you should design a state in such a way that you don't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: need and require responsive citizens to go out of their way to make sure that the garbage
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, picked up from outside the building.
[Amit Varma]: It should be in the design of the system and the incentives of the state that it serves
[Amit Varma]: you anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So does good governance require good citizens?
[Guest]: I want to read you a passage from Ken Robinson's book, The Element.
[Guest]: My brother, Ian, is a musician.
[Guest]: He plays drums, piano, and bass guitar.
[Guest]: Years ago, he was in a band in Liverpool that included an extremely talented keyboard player
[Guest]: named Charles.
[Guest]: After one of their gigs, I told Charles how well I thought he played that night, and then
[Guest]: I said, I'd love to be able to play keyboards like that.
[Guest]: And he responded, no, you wouldn't.
[Unknown]: I was taken aback by that, and I insisted that I really would love to be able to play
[Guest]: keyboards like that.
[Guest]: No, he said.
[Guest]: You mean you like the idea of playing keyboards.
[Guest]: If you'd really love to play them the way I'm doing it, you'd be doing it.
[Guest]: To play as well as he did, he practiced every day for three or four hours in addition to
[Guest]: performing.
[Guest]: He'd been doing that since he was seven.
[Guest]: You can see where I'm going with this, that a very large number of people have a certain
[Guest]: imagination of their agency and willingness, which is fundamentally at odds with what they
[Guest]: say they care about.
[Guest]: This isn't hypocrisy.
[Guest]: So, I want to be careful that I'm not accusing you of being hypocritical in saying that.
[Guest]: But this is genuinely a failure to recognize what it takes to become a great keyboard player
[Guest]: or as much a great citizen.
[Guest]: There isn't an easy way to be a great citizen.
[Guest]: And if we are looking for easy ways to become great citizens, then we're doing our country
[Amit Varma]: a disservice.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually orthogonal to what I asked because I'm not, you know, how we define a
[Amit Varma]: great citizen can sort of differ, like I'm, you know, I don't understand why you have
[Amit Varma]: to define a citizen as good or bad because citizens don't exist for the sake of the state.
[Amit Varma]: The state exists for the sake of the citizens.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't really care if a citizen is good or bad.
[Amit Varma]: I care if the state is good or bad.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of that has to do with sort of the design of the state itself.
[Amit Varma]: And so I don't even understand that this is not like keyboard playing.
[Amit Varma]: I am, therefore I exist.
[Amit Varma]: I am a citizen.
[Amit Varma]: Good or bad for whom?
[Guest]: I don't know, I'm not denying that.
[Guest]: What I'm pointing out is the state is a construction of the citizens, that whereas there may have
[Guest]: been one construction of it or several constructions of it in the past, it is nonetheless obligatory
[Guest]: on our part to reimagine a new construction of it in line with our imagination of what
[Guest]: we want it to be today, too.
[Guest]: That's really what I'm trying to say, that we don't have to take prior constructions
[Guest]: of the state as the only imagination of it possible today.
[Guest]: And as much as it is difficult to engage with this really difficult beast in some way, and
[Guest]: I think that's the part that I hear quite emotionally from you even, it is difficult.
[Guest]: But I don't see any other way.
[Guest]: That's all I'm really trying to say.
[Guest]: I can't think of any other way that has even the limited potential of, it's sort of like
[Guest]: saying you've come to an obstacle, a bunch of woods along your journey, and there's no
[Unknown]: way around it.
[Guest]: It's only through it that you have to go.
[Guest]: And it's certainly true that going through it isn't easy, but I don't think there's any
[Guest]: path around it.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: I just want to say that I would love it if 100% of my listeners are in 100% agreement
[Amit Varma]: with you and they engage with the state and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I myself am inspired by a lot of what you say.
[Amit Varma]: One thing that I'm trying to point out is, though I'm getting a little meta and I'm saying
[Amit Varma]: that the locus of the problem is not the citizen's engagement with the state.
[Amit Varma]: It is a design of the state, which is also at the same time a disincentive on the citizen
[Amit Varma]: engaging with it, which is not therefore a reason for me to give up.
[Amit Varma]: It is a reason for, I think, deeper thinking and not imagine that just engagement alone
[Amit Varma]: is a solution, which I don't believe it is.
[Amit Varma]: I think as much as we engage, and it's obviously a simultaneous process, as much as we engage
[Amit Varma]: to get the state to be responsive in the ways that it can actually be responsive to us,
[Amit Varma]: I think we also need to think about the broader root causes of the problem and take that seriously
[Amit Varma]: and in whatever way we can keep that discourse going.
[Guest]: I think we're saying the same thing to each other.
[Guest]: This word alone wasn't added by me.
[Guest]: I also did not contend that engagement alone is the answer.
[Guest]: I think you're certainly right in pointing out that more than engagement is needed.
[Guest]: I look at engagement as necessary but not sufficient.
[Guest]: So in a way, so I say, look, if it's necessary but not sufficient, let's set about doing
[Guest]: the necessary part, and perhaps the sufficient things will also emerge along the way.
[Guest]: And maybe I'm just not bright enough to have thought about what the sufficient parts also
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: But I also remember something that I said to you the last time we had such a long conversation,
[Guest]: which was that I see myself as an inheritor of other people's struggles for a progressive
[Guest]: society, that I would not say that someone like Gokhale failed because he did not live
[Guest]: to see independence.
[Guest]: I wouldn't say that somebody like Jayaprakash Narayan failed because the reimagination of
[Guest]: land reform that he advocated didn't happen fully.
[Guest]: I think each of us in our lives has a role to play in this larger imagination of the
[Guest]: life of the country.
[Guest]: And we have to be comfortable with the idea that we're contributing to it.
[Guest]: And I've said this to you too.
[Guest]: I think your podcast is an important contribution to these conversations.
[Guest]: I heard Arvind say a few weeks ago on your show that you haven't really arrived as a
[Guest]: public intellectual until you're on this show.
[Unknown]: Anyway, I sent you my thoughts about that separately.
[Unknown]: But in any event, I think programs like this are an important part of that journey as well.
[Guest]: And I really, I think one could say at a much smaller level, is this enough?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Is this necessary?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: I think it's necessary.
[Amit Varma]: These are such wise words, Red.
[Amit Varma]: I'll happily let you have the last word here.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, thanks so much for being so generous with your time and insights.
[Amit Varma]: I really appreciate you coming on the show.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Unknown]: You know, I have to say that I really enjoyed this conversation.
[Guest]: I was a little bit at the beginning unsure how much of a conversation about urbanization
[Guest]: alone we could have for a long period.
[Guest]: I think, by and large, I've tended to do the longer episodes on your program, too.
[Guest]: Even the last one was quite long.
[Guest]: And I can see now we're above the three-hour mark.
[Guest]: You should take some liberty to cut out certain things.
[Guest]: But it's definitely been a good conversation for me.
[Guest]: And sometimes I think these conversations educate me as much as I'm trying to tell my
[Guest]: point of view to other people.
[Guest]: I want to thank you also for the opportunity to come and have this conversation on your
[Guest]: show.
[Guest]: And if it disseminates a bunch of ideas that are interesting and important for others to
[Guest]: engage with, that's really the thing that I'm trying to do.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes where I've linked
[Amit Varma]: to Ashwin's site, ashwinmahesh.in, and some of his writing.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Ashwin on Twitter at Ashwin Mahesh.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene in the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene in the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.